# RP2350 Datasheet - Chapter 12: Peripherals (Tier 2)

Source: `rp2350-reference/datasheet/12b-i2c.pdf`

- Printed-page span: 983-1045
- Physical PDF-page span in split chapter: 1-63 (source document physical 984-1046)
- Conversion method: `pdftotext -layout` + automated markdown cleanup
- Loss notes: Diagram content is referenced by captions only; complex table layout may be degraded.

## 12.2. I2C

Synopsys Documentation
Synopsys Proprietary. Used with permission.
I2C is a commonly used 2-wire interface that can be used to connect devices for low speed data transfer using clock SCL
and data SDA wires.
RP2350 has two identical instances of an I2C controller. The external pins of each controller are connected to GPIO pins
as defined in the GPIO muxing table in Section 9.4. The muxing options give some IO flexibility.

### 12.2.1. Features

Each I2C controller is based on a configuration of the Synopsys DW_apb_i2c (v2.03a) IP. The following features are
supported:
- Master or Slave (Default to Master mode)
- Standard mode, Fast mode or Fast mode plus
- Default slave address 0x055
- Supports 10-bit addressing in Master mode
- 16-element transmit buffer
- 16-element receive buffer
- Can be driven from DMA
- Can generate interrupts

#### 12.2.1.1. Standard

The I2C controller was designed for I2C Bus specification, version 6.0, dated April 2014.

#### 12.2.1.2. Clocking

All clocks in the I2C controller are connected to clk_sys, including ic_clk, which is mentioned in later sections. The I2C
clock is generated by dividing down this clock, controlled by registers inside the block.

#### 12.2.1.3. IOs

Each controller must connect its clock SCL and data SDA to one pair of GPIOs. The I2C standard requires that drivers drive
a signal low, or when not driven the signal will be pulled high. This applies to SCL and SDA. The GPIO pads should be
configured for:
- pull-up enabled
- slew rate limited
- schmitt trigger enabled
> **NOTE**
There should also be external pull-ups on the board as the internal pad pull-ups may not be strong enough to pull up
external circuits.

### 12.2.2. IP configuration

I2C configuration details (each instance is fully independent):
- 32-bit APB access
- Supports Standard mode, Fast mode or Fast mode plus (not High speed)
- Default slave address of 0x055
- Master or Slave mode
- Master by default (Slave mode disabled at reset)

- 10-bit addressing supported in master mode (7-bit by default)
- 16 entry transmit buffer
- 16 entry receive buffer
- Allows restart conditions when a master (can be disabled for legacy device support)
- Configurable timing to adjust TsuDAT/ThDAT
- General calls responded to on reset
- Interface to DMA
- Single interrupt output
- Configurable timing to adjust clock frequency
- Spike suppression (default 7 clk_sys cycles)
- Can NACK after data received by Slave
- Hold transfer when TX FIFO empty
- Hold bus until space available in RX FIFO
- Restart detect interrupt in Slave mode
- Optional blocking Master commands (not enabled by default)

### 12.2.3. I2C overview

The I2C bus is a 2-wire serial interface, consisting of a serial data line SDA and a serial clock SCL. These wires carry
information between the devices connected to the bus. Each device is recognized by a unique address and can operate
as either a "transmitter" or "receiver", depending on the function of the device. Devices can also be considered as
masters or slaves when performing data transfers. A master is a device that initiates a data transfer on the bus and
generates the clock signals to permit that transfer. At that time, any device addressed is considered a slave.
> **NOTE**
The I2C block must only be programmed to operate in either master OR slave mode only. Operating as a master and
slave simultaneously is not supported.
The I2C block can operate in these modes:
- standard mode (with data rates from 0 to 100 kb/s),
- fast mode (with data rates up to 400 kb/s),
- fast mode plus (with data rates up to 1000 kb/s).
These modes are not supported:
- High-speed mode (with data rates up to 3.4Mb/s),
- Ultra-Fast Speed Mode (with data rates up to 5Mb/s).
> **NOTE**
References to fast mode also apply to fast mode plus, unless specifically stated otherwise.
The I2C block can communicate with devices in one of these modes as long as they are attached to the bus.
Additionally, fast mode devices are downward compatible. For instance, fast mode devices can communicate with
standard mode devices at up to 100 kb/s over the I2C bus system. However, standard mode devices are not upward
compatible and should not be incorporated in a fast-mode I2C bus system as they cannot follow the higher transfer
rate; unpredictable states would occur.

The following devices commonly use high-speed mode:
- LCD displays
- high-bit count ADCs
- high capacity EEPROMs
These devices typically need to transfer large amounts of data.
Most maintenance and control applications, the common use for the I2C bus, typically operate at 100 kHz in standard
and fast modes. Any DW_apb_i2c device can be attached to an I2C bus. Every device can talk with any master, passing
information back and forth. There needs to be at least one master (such as a microcontroller or DSP) on the bus, but
there can be multiple masters, which require them to arbitrate for ownership. Multiple masters and arbitration are
explained later in this chapter. The I2C block does not support SMBus and PMBus protocols (for System management
and Power management).
The DW_apb_i2c is made up of:
- an AMBA APB slave interface
- an I2C interface
- FIFO logic to maintain coherency between the two interfaces
The blocks of the component are illustrated in Figure 68.
> **Figure 68.** I2C Block diagram. See source PDF page 986.
The following define the functions of the blocks in Figure 68:
- AMBA Bus Interface Unit: Takes the APB interface signals and translates them into a common generic interface
that allows the register file to be bus protocol-agnostic.
- Register File: Contains configuration registers and is the interface with software.
- Slave State Machine: Follows the protocol for a slave and monitors bus for address match.
- Master State Machine: Generates the I2C protocol for the master transfers.
- Clock Generator: Calculates the required timing to do the following:
- Generate the SCL clock when configured as a master
- Check for bus idle
- Generate a START and a STOP
- Setup the data and hold the data
- RX Shift: Takes data into the design and extracts it in byte format.

- TX Shift: Presents data supplied by CPU for transfer on the I2C bus.
- RX Filter: Detects the events in the bus; for example, start, stop and arbitration lost.
- Toggle: Generates pulses on both sides and toggles to transfer signals across clock domains.
- Synchronizer: Transfers signals from one clock domain to another.
- DMA Interface: Generates the handshaking signals to the central DMA controller in order to automate the data
transfer without CPU intervention.
- Interrupt Controller: Generates the raw interrupt and interrupt flags, allowing them to be set and cleared.
- RX FIFO/TX FIFO: Holds the RX FIFO and TX FIFO register banks and controllers, along with their status levels.

### 12.2.4. I2C terminology

This section defines key terms used in various parts of the I2C.

#### 12.2.4.1. I2C bus terms

The following terms relate to how the role of the I2C device and how it interacts with other I2C devices on the bus.
Transmitter
the device that sends data to the bus. A transmitter can either be a device that initiates the data transmission to the
bus (a master-transmitter) or the device that responds to a request from the master to send data to the bus (a
slave-transmitter).
Receiver
the device that receives data from the bus. A receiver can either be a device that receives data on its own request (a
master-receiver) or a device that receives data in response to a request from the master (a slave-receiver).
Master
the component that initializes a transfer (START command), generates the clock SCL signal and terminates the
transfer (STOP command). A master can be either a transmitter or a receiver.
Slave
the device addressed by the master. A slave can be either receiver or transmitter.
Multi-master
the ability for more than one master to co-exist on the bus at the same time without collision or data loss.
Arbitration
the predefined procedure that authorizes only one master at a time to take control of the bus. For more information
about this behaviour, refer to Section 12.2.8.
Synchronization
the predefined procedure that synchronizes the clock signals provided by two or more masters. For more
information about this feature, refer to Section 12.2.9.
SDA
the data signal line (Serial Data).
SCL
the clock signal line (Serial Clock).

#### 12.2.4.2. Bus transfer terms

The following terms are specific to data transfers that occur to and from the I2C bus.
START (RESTART)
data transfer begins with a START or RESTART condition. The level of the SDA data line changes from high to low,
while the SCL clock line remains high. When this occurs, the bus becomes busy.
> **NOTE**
START and RESTART conditions are functionally identical.
STOP
data transfer is terminated by a STOP condition. This occurs when the level on the SDA data line passes from the low
state to the high state, while the SCL clock line remains high. When the data transfer has been terminated, the bus is
free or idle once again. The bus stays busy if a RESTART is generated instead of a STOP condition.

### 12.2.5. I2C behaviour

The DW_apb_i2c can be controlled with software to be one of the following:
- An I2C master only, communicating with other I2C slaves
- An I2C slave only, communicating with one or more I2C masters.
The master is responsible for generating the clock and controlling the transfer of data. The slave is responsible for
either transmitting or receiving data to and from the master. The acknowledgement of data is sent by the device that is
receiving data, which can be either a master or a slave. As mentioned previously, the I2C protocol also allows multiple
masters to reside on the I2C bus and uses an arbitration procedure to determine bus ownership.
Each slave has a unique address determined by the system designer. When a master wants to communicate with a
slave:
1. The master transmits a START/RESTART condition that is then followed by the slave’s address and a control bit
(R/W) to determine if the master wants to transmit data or receive data from the slave.
2. The slave then sends an acknowledge (ACK) pulse after the address.
When the master (master-transmitter) writes to the slave (slave-receiver), the receiver gets one byte of data. This
transaction continues until the master terminates the transmission with a STOP condition.
When the master reads from a slave (master-receiver), the slave transmits (slave-transmitter) a byte of data to the
master. The master then acknowledges the transaction with the ACK pulse. This transaction continues until the master
terminates the transmission by not acknowledging (NACK) the transaction after the last byte is received, and then the
master issues a STOP condition or addresses another slave after issuing a RESTART condition. This behaviour is
illustrated in Figure 69.
> **Figure 69.** Data transfer on the I2C Bus. See source PDF page 988.
The DW_apb_i2c is a synchronous serial interface. The SDA line is a bidirectional signal that changes only while the SCL line
is low except for STOP, START, and RESTART conditions. The output drivers are open-drain or open-collector to perform
wire-AND functions on the bus. The maximum number of devices on the bus is limited by only the maximum
capacitance specification of 400 pF. Data is transmitted in byte packages.
The I2C protocols implemented in DW_apb_i2c are described in more details in Section 12.2.6.

#### 12.2.5.1. START and STOP generation

When operating as an I2C master, putting data into the TX FIFO causes the DW_apb_i2c to generate a START condition on
the I2C bus. Writing a 1 to IC_DATA_CMD.STOP causes the DW_apb_i2c to generate a STOP condition on the I2C bus; a
STOP condition is not issued if this bit is not set, even if the TX FIFO is empty.
When operating as a slave, the DW_apb_i2c does not generate START and STOP conditions, as per the protocol. However,
if a read request is made to the DW_apb_i2c, it holds the SCL line low until read data has been supplied to it. This stalls the
I2C bus until read data is provided to the slave DW_apb_i2c, or the DW_apb_i2c slave is disabled by writing a 0 to
IC_ENABLE.ENABLE.

#### 12.2.5.2. Combined formats

The DW_apb_i2c supports mixed read and write combined format transactions in both 7-bit and 10-bit addressing modes.
The DW_apb_i2c does not support mixed address and mixed address format - that is, a 7-bit address transaction followed
by a 10-bit address transaction or vice versa-combined format transactions. To initiate combined format transfers,
IC_CON.IC_RESTART_EN should be set to 1. With this value set and operating as a master, when the DW_apb_i2c
completes an I2C transfer, it checks the TX FIFO and executes the next transfer. If the direction of this transfer differs
from the previous transfer, the combined format is used to issue the transfer. If the TX FIFO is empty when the current
I2C transfer completes:
- IC_DATA_CMD.STOP is checked and:
- If set to 1, a STOP bit is issued.
- If set to 0, the SCL is held low until the next command is written to the TX FIFO.
For more details, refer to Section 12.2.7.

### 12.2.6. I2C protocols

This section defines protocols used in the DW_apb_i2c.

#### 12.2.6.1. START and STOP conditions

When the bus is idle, both the SCL and SDA signals are pulled high through external pull-up resistors on the bus. When the
master wants to start a transmission on the bus, the master issues a START condition: a high-to-low transition of the
SDA signal while SCL is 1. When the master wants to terminate the transmission, the master issues a STOP condition: a
low-to-high transition of the SDA signal while SCL is 1. Figure 70 shows the timing of the START and STOP conditions.
When data is being transmitted on the bus, the SDA signal must be stable when SCL is set to 1.
> **Figure 70.** I2C START and STOP Condition. See source PDF page 989.

> **NOTE**
The signal transitions for the START/STOP conditions, as depicted in Figure 70, reflect those observed at the output
signals of the master driving the I2C bus. Care should be taken when observing the SDA/SCL signals at the input
signals of slaves, because unequal line delays may result in an incorrect SDA/SCL timing relationship.

#### 12.2.6.2. Addressing slave protocol

There are two address formats: 7-bit and 10-bit.

#### 12.2.6.2.1. 7-bit address format

In the 7-bit address format, the first seven bits (bits 7:1) of the first byte set the slave address and the LSB bit (bit 0)
defines the R/W status, as shown in Figure 71. When bit 0 is set to 0, the master writes to the slave. When bit 0 is set to
1, the master reads from the slave.
> **Figure 71.** I2C 7-bit Address Format. See source PDF page 990.

#### 12.2.6.2.2. 10-bit address format

The 10-bit address format transfers two bytes for each 10-bit address.
- In the first byte, the first five bits (bits 7:3) indicate a 10-bit transfer. The next two bits (bits 2:1) contain bits 9:8 of
the slave address. The LSB bit (bit 0) defines the R/W status.
- The second byte contains bits 7:0 of the slave address.
Figure 72 shows the 10-bit address format:
> **Figure 72.** 10-bit Address Format. See source PDF page 990.
This table defines the special purpose and reserved first byte addresses.
Table 1051.
Slave Address                                                         R/W Bit                   Description
I2C/SMBus Definition
of Bits in First Byte
0000 000                                                                 0                      General Call Address. DW_apb_i2c
places the data in the receive buffer
and issues a General Call interrupt.
0000 000                                                                 1                      START byte. For more details, refer to
Section 12.2.6.4.
0000 001                                                                 X                      CBUS address. DW_apb_i2c ignores
these accesses.
0000 010                                                                 X                      Reserved.

Slave Address                                                                       R/W Bit               Description
0000 011                                                                                X                 Reserved.
0000 1XX                                                                                X                 High-speed master code (for more
information, refer to Section 12.2.8).
1111 1XX                                                                                X                 Reserved.
1111 0XX                                                                                X                 10-bit slave addressing.
0001 000                                                                                X                 SMbus Host. (not supported)
0001 100                                                                                X                 SMBus Alert Response Address. (not
supported)
1100 001                                                                                X                 SMBus Device Default Address. (not
supported)
DW_apb_i2c does not restrict you from using reserved addresses. However, if you use these reserved addresses, you may
experience incompatibilities with I2C components.

#### 12.2.6.3. Transmitting and receiving protocol

The master can initiate data transmission and reception to and from the bus, acting as either a master-transmitter or
master-receiver. A slave responds to requests from the master to either transmit data or receive data to/from the bus,
acting as either a slave-transmitter or slave-receiver, respectively.

#### 12.2.6.3.1. Master-transmitter and slave-receiver

All data is transmitted in byte format, with no limit on the number of bytes transferred per data transfer. After the master
sends the address and R/W bit or the master transmits a byte of data to the slave, the slave-receiver must respond with
the acknowledge signal (ACK). When no slave-receiver responds with an ACK pulse, the master aborts the transfer by
issuing a STOP condition. The slave must leave the SDA line high so that the master can abort the transfer. If the master-
transmitter is transmitting data as shown in Figure 73, the slave-receiver responds to the master-transmitter with an
acknowledge pulse after every byte of data is received.
> **Figure 73.** I2C Master-Transmitter Protocol. See source PDF page 991.

#### 12.2.6.3.2. Master-receiver and slave-transmitter

If the master is receiving data as shown in Figure 74 the master responds to the slave-transmitter with an acknowledge
pulse after receiving each byte of data, except for the last byte. This is the way the master-receiver notifies the slave-
transmitter that this is the last byte. The slave-transmitter relinquishes the SDA line after detecting No Acknowledge
(NACK) so that the master can issue a STOP condition.

> **Figure 74.** I2C Master-Receiver Protocol. See source PDF page 992.
When a master does not want to relinquish the bus with a STOP condition, the master can issue a RESTART condition.
This is identical to a START condition except it occurs after the ACK pulse. Operating in master mode, the DW_apb_i2c can
then communicate with the same slave using a transfer of a different direction. For a description of the combined
format transactions that the DW_apb_i2c supports, see Section 12.2.5.2.
> **NOTE**
The DW_apb_i2c must be completely disabled before the target slave address register (IC_TAR) can be reprogrammed.

#### 12.2.6.4. START BYTE Transfer Protocol

The START BYTE transfer protocol is designed for systems that do not have an on-board dedicated I2C hardware
module. When the DW_apb_i2c is addressed as a slave, it always samples the I2C bus at the highest speed supported so
that it never requires a START BYTE transfer. However, when DW_apb_i2c is a master, it supports the generation of START
BYTE transfers at the beginning of every transfer in case a slave device requires it.
This protocol consists of the transmission of seven zeros, followed by a one, as illustrated in Figure 75. This allows the
processor polling the bus to under-sample the address phase until zero is detected. Once the microcontroller detects a
zero, it switches from the under sampling rate to the correct rate of the master.
> **Figure 75.** I2C Start Byte Transfer. See source PDF page 992.
The START BYTE procedure is as follows:
1. Master generates a START condition.
2. Master transmits the START byte (0000 0001).
3. Master transmits the ACK clock pulse. (Present only to conform with the byte handling format used on the bus)
4. No slave sets the ACK signal to zero.
5. Master generates a RESTART (R) condition.
Hardware receivers do not respond to the START BYTE procedure because it uses a reserved address and resets after
the RESTART condition generates.

### 12.2.7. TX FIFO Management and START, STOP and RESTART Generation

When operating as a master, the DW_apb_i2c component supports the mode of TX (transmit) FIFO management
illustrated in Figure 76.

#### 12.2.7.1. TX FIFO management

The component does not generate a STOP if the TX FIFO becomes empty; in this situation the component holds the SCL
line low, stalling the bus until a new entry is available in the TX FIFO. A STOP condition is generated only when the user
specifically requests it by setting bit nine (Stop bit) of the command written to IC_DATA_CMD register. Figure 76 shows
the bits in the IC_DATA_CMD register.

> **Figure 76.** IC_DATA_CMD register bit fields. Bit 9 is `Restart`; bit 8 is `Stop`; bit 7 is `CMD`; bits 6:0 are `DATA`.
> `DATA` is a read/write field; data retrieved from the slave is read from this field and data to be sent to the slave is
> written to this field.
> `CMD` is a write-only field that determines whether transfer is Read (`CMD=1`) or Write (`CMD=0`).
> `Stop` is a write-only field that determines whether STOP is generated after a data byte is sent or received.
> `Restart` is a write-only field that determines whether RESTART (or STOP followed by START if restart capability is not
> enabled) is generated before data is sent or received. See source PDF page 993.

Figure 77 illustrates the behaviour of the DW_apb_i2c when the TX FIFO becomes empty while operating as a master
transmitter, as well as the generation of a STOP condition.
> **Figure 77.** Master Transmitter - TX FIFO Empties/STOP Generation. See source PDF page 993.
Figure 78 illustrates the behaviour of the DW_apb_i2c when the TX FIFO becomes empty while operating as a master
receiver, as well as the generation of a STOP condition.
> **Figure 78.** Master Receiver - TX FIFO Empties/STOP Generation. See source PDF page 993.
Figure 79 and Figure 80 illustrate configurations where the user can control the generation of RESTART conditions on
the I2C bus. If bit 10 (Restart) of the IC_DATA_CMD register is set and the restart capability is enabled (IC_RESTART_EN=1),
a RESTART is generated before the data byte is written to or read from the slave. If the restart capability is not enabled,
a STOP followed by a START is generated in place of the RESTART. Figure 79 illustrates this situation during operation
as a master transmitter.

> **Figure 79.** Master Transmitter - Restart Bit of IC_DATA_CMD Is Set. See source PDF page 994.
Figure 80 illustrates the same situation, but during operation as a master receiver.
> **Figure 80.** Master Receiver - Restart Bit of IC_DATA_CMD Is Set. See source PDF page 994.
Figure 81 illustrates operation as a master transmitter where the Stop bit of the IC_DATA_CMD register is set and the TX
FIFO is not empty.
> **Figure 81.** Master Transmitter - Stop Bit of IC_DATA_CMD Set/TX FIFO not empty. See source PDF page 994.
Figure 82 illustrates operation as a master transmitter where the first byte loaded into the TX FIFO is allowed to go
empty with the Restart bit set.
> **Figure 82.** Master Transmitter - First Byte Loaded Into TX FIFO Allowed to Empty, Restart Bit Set. See source PDF page 994.
Figure 83 illustrates operation as a master receiver where the Stop bit of the IC_DATA_CMD register is set and the TX
FIFO is not empty.
> **Figure 83.** Master Receiver - Stop Bit of IC_DATA_CMD Set/TX FIFO Not Empty. See source PDF page 994.
Figure 84 illustrates operation as a master receiver where the first command loaded after the TX FIFO is allowed to
empty and the Restart bit is set.

> **Figure 84.** Master Receiver - First Command Loaded After TX FIFO Allowed to Empty/Restart Bit Set. See source PDF page 995.

### 12.2.8. Multiple master arbitration

The DW_apb_i2c bus protocol allows multiple masters to reside on the same bus. If there are two masters on the same
I2C bus, there is an arbitration procedure if both try to take control of the bus at the same time by generating a START
condition at the same time. Once a master (for example, a microcontroller) has control of the bus, no other master can
take control until the first master sends a STOP condition and places the bus in an idle state.
Arbitration takes place on the SDA line, while the SCL line is set to 1. The master, which transmits a one while the other
master transmits zero, loses arbitration and turns off its data output stage. The master that lost arbitration can continue
to generate clocks until the end of the byte transfer. If both masters address the same slave device, the arbitration
could go into the data phase.
Upon detecting that it has lost arbitration to another master, the DW_apb_i2c stops generating SCL by disabling the output
driver. Figure 85 illustrates the timing of two masters arbitrating on the bus.
> **Figure 85.** Multiple Master Arbitration. See source PDF page 995.
Control of the bus is determined by address or master code and data sent by competing masters, so there is no central
master nor any order of priority on the bus.
Arbitration is not allowed between the following conditions:
- A RESTART condition and a data bit
- A STOP condition and a data bit
- A RESTART condition and a STOP condition
> **NOTE**
Slaves do not participate in the arbitration process.

### 12.2.9. Clock synchronisation

When two or more masters try to transfer information on the bus at the same time, they must arbitrate and synchronize
the SCL clock. All masters generate their own clock to transfer messages. Data is valid only during the high period of SCL

clock. Clock synchronisation is performed using the wired-AND connection to the SCL signal. When the master
transitions the SCL clock to zero, the master starts counting the low time of the SCL clock and transitions the SCL clock
signal to one at the beginning of the next clock period. However, if another master is holding the SCL line to 0, then the
master goes into a HIGH wait state until the SCL clock line transitions to one.
All masters then count off their high time, and the master with the shortest high time transitions the SCL line to zero. The
masters then count out their low time and the one with the longest low time forces the other masters into a HIGH wait
state. Therefore, a synchronized SCL clock is generated, which is illustrated in Figure 86. Optionally, slaves may hold the
SCL line low to slow down the timing on the I2C bus.
> **Figure 86.** Multi-Master Clock Synchronisation. See source PDF page 996.

### 12.2.10. Operation modes

This section provides information about operation modes.
> **NOTE**
Only set the DW_apb_i2c to operate as an I2C Master or an I2C Slave. Never set the DW_apb_i2c to operate as both
simultaneously. To avoid this, never simultaneously set IC_CON.IC_SLAVE_DISABLE and IC_CON.MASTER_MODE to
zero and one, respectively.

#### 12.2.10.1. Slave mode operation

This section discusses slave mode procedures.

#### 12.2.10.1.1. Initial configuration

To use the DW_apb_i2c as a slave, perform the following steps:
1. Disable the DW_apb_i2c by writing a 0 to IC_ENABLE.ENABLE.
2. Write to the IC_SAR register (bits 9:0) to set the slave address. This is the address to which the DW_apb_i2c
responds.
3. Write to the IC_CON register to specify which type of addressing is supported (7-bit or 10-bit by setting bit 3).
Enable the DW_apb_i2c in slave-only mode by writing a 0 into bit six (IC_CON.IC_SLAVE_DISABLE) and a 0 to bit zero
(IC_CON.MASTER_MODE).

> **NOTE**
Slaves and masters can use different addressing settings. For instance, a slave can be programmed with 7-bit
addressing and a master with 10-bit addressing, and vice versa.
4. Enable the DW_apb_i2c by writing a 1 to IC_ENABLE.ENABLE.
> **NOTE**
Depending on the reset values chosen, steps two and three may not be necessary because the reset values can be
configured. For instance, if the device is only going to be a master, there would be no need to set the slave address
because you can configure DW_apb_i2c to have the slave disabled after reset and to enable the master after reset. The
values stored are static and do not need to be reprogrammed if the DW_apb_i2c is disabled.
 WARNING
Only bring the DW_apb_i2c Slave out of reset when the I2C bus is IDLE. De-asserting the reset when a transfer is
ongoing on the bus causes internal synchronization flip-flops used to synchronize SDA and SCL to toggle from a reset
value of one to the actual value on the bus. This can result in SDA toggling from one to zero while SCL is one, thereby
causing a false START condition to be detected by the DW_apb_i2c Slave. This scenario can also be avoided by
configuring the DW_apb_i2c with IC_SLAVE_DISABLE = 1 and MASTER_MODE = 1 so that the Slave interface is disabled after
reset. It can then be enabled by programming IC_CON[0] = 0 and IC_CON[6] = 0 after the internal SDA and SCL have
synchronized to the value on the bus; this takes approximately six ic_clk cycles after reset de-assertion.

#### 12.2.10.1.2. Slave-transmitter operation for a single byte

When another I2C master device on the bus addresses the DW_apb_i2c and requests data, the DW_apb_i2c acts as a slave-
transmitter. The following steps occur:
1. The other I2C master device initiates an I2C transfer with an address that matches the slave address in the IC_SAR
register of the DW_apb_i2c.
2. The DW_apb_i2c acknowledges the sent address and recognizes the direction of the transfer to indicate that it is
acting as a slave-transmitter.
3. The DW_apb_i2c asserts the RD_REQ interrupt (bit five of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register) and holds the SCL line low. It
remains in a wait state until software responds. If the RD_REQ interrupt has been masked, due to
IC_INTR_MASK.M_RD_REQ being set to zero, use a hardware and/or software timing routine to instruct the CPU to
perform periodic reads of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
- Reads that indicate IC_RAW_INTR_STAT.RD_REQ being set to one must be treated as the equivalent of the
RD_REQ interrupt being asserted.
- Software must then act to satisfy the I2C transfer.
- The timing interval used should be in the order of 10 times the fastest SCL clock period the DW_apb_i2c can
handle. For example, for 400 kb/s, the timing interval is 25μs.
> **NOTE**
The value of 10 is recommended here because this is approximately the amount of time required for a
single byte of data transferred on the I2C bus.
4. If there is any data remaining in the TX FIFO before receiving the read request, the DW_apb_i2c asserts a TX_ABRT
interrupt (bit six of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register) to flush the old data from the TX FIFO. If the TX_ABRT interrupt
has been masked, due to IC_INTR_MASK.M_TX_ABRT being set to zero, re-use the timing routine described in the
previous step to read the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.

> **NOTE**
Because the DW_apb_i2c's TX FIFO is forced into a flushed/reset state whenever a TX_ABRT event occurs, software
must release the DW_apb_i2c from this state by reading the IC_CLR_TX_ABRT register before attempting to write
into the TX FIFO. See register IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for more details.
- Reads that indicate bit six (R_TX_ABRT) being set to one must be treated as the equivalent of the TX_ABRT
interrupt being asserted.
- There is no further action required from software.
- The timing interval used should be similar to that described in the previous step for the
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT.RD_REQ register.
5. Software writes to the IC_DATA_CMD register with the data to be written (by writing a 0 in bit 8).
6. Software must clear the RD_REQ and TX_ABRT interrupts (bits five and six, respectively) of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT
register before proceeding. If the RD_REQ or TX_ABRT interrupts have been masked, then clearing of the
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register will have already been performed when either the R_RD_REQ or R_TX_ABRT bit has been
read as one.
7. The DW_apb_i2c releases the SCL and transmits the byte.
8. The master may hold the I2C bus by issuing a RESTART condition or release the bus by issuing a STOP condition.
> **NOTE**
Slave-Transmitter Operation for a single byte is not applicable in Ultra-Fast mode, since this mode does not support
read transfers.

#### 12.2.10.1.3. Slave-receiver operation for a single byte

When another I2C master device on the bus addresses the DW_apb_i2c and is sending data, the DW_apb_i2c acts as a slave-
receiver and the following steps occur:
1. The other I2C master device initiates an I2C transfer with an address that matches the DW_apb_i2c's slave address in
the IC_SAR register.
2. The DW_apb_i2c acknowledges the sent address and recognizes the direction of the transfer to indicate that the
DW_apb_i2c is acting as a slave-receiver.
3. DW_apb_i2c receives the transmitted byte and places it in the receive buffer.
> **NOTE**
If the Rx (receive) FIFO is completely filled with data when a byte is pushed, then the DW_apb_i2c slave holds the
I2C SCL line low until the Rx FIFO has some space, and then continues with the next read request.
4. DW_apb_i2c asserts the RX_FULL interrupt IC_RAW_INTR_STAT.RX_FULL. If the RX_FULL interrupt has been masked, due
to setting IC_INTR_MASK.M_RX_FULL to zero or setting IC_TX_TL to a value larger than zero, you should
implement a timing routine (described in Section 12.2.10.1.2) for periodic reads of the IC_STATUS register. This
timing routine should treat reads of the IC_STATUS register, with bit 3 (RFNE) set at one as the equivalent of an
RX_FULL interrupt.
5. Software may read the byte from the IC_DATA_CMD register (bits 7:0).
6. The other master device may hold the I2C bus by issuing a RESTART condition, or release the bus by issuing a
STOP condition.

#### 12.2.10.1.4. Slave-transfer operation for bulk transfers

In the standard I2C protocol, all transactions are single byte transactions; the programmer responds to a remote master
read request by writing one byte into the slave’s TX FIFO. When a slave (slave-transmitter) receives a read request
(RD_REQ) from the remote master (master-receiver), at a minimum there should be at least one entry placed into the
slave-transmitter’s TX FIFO.
DW_apb_i2c handles more data in the TX FIFO. This enables subsequent read requests to take data without raising an
interrupt. This eliminates latencies incurred between interrupts. This mode only occurs when DW_apb_i2c acts as a slave-
transmitter. If the remote master acknowledges the data sent by the slave-transmitter and there is no data in the slave’s
TX FIFO, the DW_apb_i2c holds the I2C SCL line low while it raises the read request interrupt (RD_REQ) and waits for a data
write into the TX FIFO.
If the RD_REQ interrupt is masked by setting IC_INTR_STAT.R_RD_REQ to zero, use a timing routine to activate periodic
reads of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register. Reads of IC_RAW_INTR_STAT that return bit five (RD_REQ) set to one must be
treated as the equivalent of RD_REQ. This timing routine is similar to that described in Section 12.2.10.1.2.
The RD_REQ interrupt is raised upon a read request. Always clear this interrupt when exiting the interrupt service handling
routine (ISR). The ISR allows you to either write one byte or more than one byte into the TX FIFO. The master can
request additional data at the end of a transmission by acknowledging the last byte. In this scenario, the slave must
raise RD_REQ again.
If you know in advance that the remote master requests a packet of n bytes, you can write n byte to the TX FIFO. Then,
when another master addresses DW_apb_i2c and requests data, the remote master will receive a continuous stream of
data. This happens because the DW_apb_i2c slave continues to send data to the remote master as long as the remote
master acknowledges the data sent and there is data available in the TX FIFO. There is no need to hold the SCL line low
or to issue RD_REQ again.
If the remote master doesn’t read all of the bytes from the TX FIFO, the DW_apb_i2c ignores the excess bytes with the
following procedure:
- The DW_apb_i2c clears the TX FIFO.
- The DW_apb_i2c generates a transmit abort (TX_ABRT) event.
At the time an ACK/NACK is expected, if a NACK is received, then the remote master has all the data it wants. At this
time, a flag is raised within the slave’s state machine to clear the leftover data in the TX FIFO. This flag is transferred to
the processor bus clock domain where the FIFO exists and the contents of the TX FIFO is cleared at that time.

#### 12.2.10.2. Master mode operation

This section discusses master mode procedures.

#### 12.2.10.2.1. Initial configuration

To use the DW_apb_i2c as a master, perform the following steps:
1. Disable the DW_apb_i2c by writing zero to IC_ENABLE.ENABLE.
2. Write to the IC_CON register to set the maximum speed mode supported (bits 2:1) and the desired speed of the
DW_apb_i2c master-initiated transfers, either 7-bit or 10-bit addressing (bit 4). Ensure that bit six
(IC_SLAVE_DISABLE) is written with a 1 and bit zero (MASTER_MODE) is written with a 1.

> **NOTE**
Slaves and masters can use different addressing settings. For instance, a slave can be programmed with 7-bit
addressing and a master with 10-bit addressing, and vice versa.
3. Write the address of the I2C device to be addressed to bits 9:0 of the IC_TAR register. This register also
determines whether the I2C will perform a General Call or a START BYTE command.
4. Enable the DW_apb_i2c by writing a one to IC_ENABLE.ENABLE.
5. Write the transfer direction and the data to be sent to the IC_DATA_CMD register. This step generates the START
condition and the address byte on the DW_apb_i2c. Once DW_apb_i2c is enabled and there is data in the TX FIFO,
DW_apb_i2c starts reading the data.
> **NOTE**
If you write to the IC_DATA_CMD register before enabling the DW_apb_i2c, the data and commands are lost: the
buffers are kept cleared when DW_apb_i2c is disabled.
The values stored are static and do not need to be reprogrammed when the DW_apb_i2c is disabled except for transfer
direction and data. As a result, you may not need to perform steps two, three, four, and five if you already configured the
reset values.

#### 12.2.10.2.2. Master transmit and master receive

The DW_apb_i2c supports switching back and forth between reading and writing dynamically. To transmit data, write data
to the lower byte of the I2C RX/TX Data Buffer and Command Register (IC_DATA_CMD). For I2C write operations, write
zero to the CMD bit [8]. Subsequently, to issue a read command, write a one to the CMD bit and write don’t care to the
lower byte of the IC_DATA_CMD register. The DW_apb_i2c master continues to initiate transfers as long as there are
commands present in the TX FIFO. If the TX FIFO becomes empty, the master performs one of the following actions
based on the value of IC_DATA_CMD:
- If set to one, it issues a STOP condition after completing the current transfer.
- If set to zero, it holds SCL low until next command is written to the TX FIFO.
For more details, refer to Section 12.2.7.

#### 12.2.10.3. Disabling DW_apb_i2c

The IC_ENABLE_STATUS register allows software to unambiguously determine when the I2C hardware has completely
shut down.
> **NOTE**
Earlier versions of DW_apb_i2c required the programmer to monitor two registers: (IC_STATUS and
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT). RP2350 only requires the programmer to monitor IC_ENABLE_STATUS.
To shut down I2C hardware, write a zero to IC_ENABLE.ENABLE. The DW_apb_i2c master can be disabled only if the
command currently processing when the de-assertion occurs has the STOP bit set to one. If you attempt to disable the
DW_apb_i2c master while processing a command without the STOP bit set, the DW_apb_i2c master continues to remain
active, holding the SCL line low until a new command is received in the TX FIFO.
To relinquish the I2C bus and disable DW_apb_i2c while the DW_apb_i2c master is processing a command without the STOP
bit set, issue an ABORT request.

#### 12.2.10.3.1. Procedure

1. Define a timer interval (ti2c_poll) equal to the 10 times the signalling period for the highest I2C transfer speed used in
the system and supported by DW_apb_i2c. For example, if the highest I2C transfer mode is 400 kb/s, ti2c_poll is 25μs.
2. Define a maximum time-out parameter, MAX_T_POLL_COUNT, such that if any repeated polling operation exceeds this
maximum value, an error is reported.
3. Execute a blocking thread, process, or function that prevents any further I2C master transactions from starting
from software, but allows any pending transfers to be completed.
> **NOTE**
This step can be ignored if DW_apb_i2c is programmed to operate as an I2C slave only.
1. The variable POLL_COUNT is initialized to zero.
2. Set bit zero of the IC_ENABLE register to zero.
3. Read the IC_ENABLE_STATUS register and test the IC_EN bit (bit 0). Increment POLL_COUNT by one. If
POLL_COUNT >= MAX_T_POLL_COUNT, exit with the relevant error code.
4. If IC_ENABLE_STATUS[0] is one, sleep for ti2c_poll and proceed to the previous step. Otherwise, exit with a
relevant success code.

#### 12.2.10.4. Aborting I2C transfers

The ABORT control bit of the IC_ENABLE register allows the software to relinquish the I2C bus before completing the
issued transfer commands from the TX FIFO. In response to an ABORT request, the controller issues the STOP condition
over the I2C bus, followed by a TX FIFO flush. Aborting the transfer is allowed only in master mode of operation.

#### 12.2.10.4.1. Procedure

1. Stop filling the TX FIFO (IC_DATA_CMD) with new commands.
2. When operating in DMA mode, disable the transmit DMA by setting TDMAE to zero.
3. Set IC_ENABLE.ABORT to one.
4. Wait for the M_TX_ABRT interrupt.
5. Read the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register to identify the source as ABRT_USER_ABRT.

### 12.2.11. Spike suppression

The DW_apb_i2c contains programmable spike suppression logic that matches requirements imposed by the I2C Bus
Specification for SS/FS modes. This logic is based on counters that monitor the input signals (SCL and SDA), checking if
they remain stable for a predetermined amount of ic_clk cycles before they are sampled internally. There is one
separate counter for each signal (SCL and SDA). The number of ic_clk cycles can be programmed by the user. The value
should account for the frequency of ic_clk and the relevant spike length specification. Each counter starts whenever its
input signal changes value. Depending on the behaviour of the input signal, one of the following scenarios occurs:
- The input signal remains unchanged until the counter reaches its count limit value. When this happens, the counter
resets and stops, and the internal version of the signal updates to the input value.
- The input signal changes again before the counter reaches its count limit value. When this happens, the counter
resets and stops, but the internal version of the signal does not update.
The timing diagram in Figure 87 illustrates the behaviour described above.

> **Figure 87.** Spike Suppression Example. See source PDF page 1002.
> **NOTE**
There is a 2-stage synchronizer on the SCL input. For the sake of simplicity, this synchronization delay was not
included in the timing diagram in Figure 87.
The I2C Bus Specification calls for different maximum spike lengths according to the operating mode (50 ns for SS and
FS). Register IC_FS_SPKLEN holds the maximum spike length for SS and FS modes.
This register is 8 bits wide and accessible through the APB interface for reads and writes. However, you can only write
to this register when the DW_apb_i2c is disabled. The minimum value that can be programmed into these registers is one;
attempting to program a value smaller than one results in the value one being written.
The default value for these registers is based on the value of 100 ns for ic_clk period, so should be updated for the
clk_sys period in use on RP2350.
> **NOTE**
- Because the minimum value that can be programmed into the IC_FS_SPKLEN register is one, the spike length
specification can be exceeded for low frequencies of ic_clk. Consider the simple example of a 10 MHz (100 ns
period) ic_clk; in this case, the minimum spike length that can be programmed is 100 ns, which means that
spikes up to this length are suppressed.
- Standard synchronization logic (two flip-flops in series) is implemented upstream of the spike suppression
logic and is not affected in any way by the contents of the spike length registers or the operation of the spike
suppression logic; the two operations (synchronization and spike suppression) are completely independent.
Because the SCL and SDA inputs are asynchronous to ic_clk, there is one ic_clk cycle uncertainty in the sampling
of these signals. Depending on when they occur relative to the rising edge of ic_clk, spikes of the same original
length might show a difference of one ic_clk cycle after being sampled.
- Spike suppression is symmetrical; the behaviour is exactly the same for transitions from zero to one and from
one to zero.

### 12.2.12. Fast mode plus operation

In fast mode plus, the DW_apb_i2c extends fast mode operation to be support speeds up to 1000 kb/s. To enable the
DW_apb_i2c for fast mode plus operation, perform the following steps before initiating any data transfer:
1. Set ic_clk frequency greater than or equal to 32 MHz (refer to Section 12.2.14.2.1).
2. Program the IC_CON register [2:1] = 2’b10 for fast mode or fast mode plus.
3. Program IC_FS_SCL_LCNT and IC_FS_SCL_HCNT registers to meet the fast mode plus SCL (refer to Section
12.2.14).
4. Program the IC_FS_SPKLEN register to suppress the maximum spike of 50 ns.
5. Program the IC_SDA_SETUP register to meet the minimum data setup time (tSU; DAT).

### 12.2.13. Bus clear feature

DW_apb_i2c supports the bus clear feature that provides graceful recovery of data SDA and clock SCL lines during unlikely
events in which either the clock or data line is stuck at LOW.

#### 12.2.13.1. SDA line is stuck at LOW

In case of SDA line stuck at LOW, the master performs the following actions to recover as shown in Figure 88 and Figure
89:
1. Master sends a maximum of nine clock pulses to recover the bus LOW within those nine clocks.
- The number of clock pulses will vary with the number of bits that remain to be sent by the slave. As the
maximum number of bits is nine, master sends up to nine clock pluses and allows the slave to recover.
- The master attempts to assert a Logic 1 on the SDA line and check whether SDA is recovered. If the SDA is not
recovered, it will continue to send a maximum of nine SCL clocks.
2. If SDA line is recovered within nine clock pulses, the master will send STOP to release the bus.
3. If SDA line is not recovered even after the ninth clock pulse, you must hardware reset the system.
> **Figure 88.** SDA Recovery with 9 SCL Clocks. See source PDF page 1003.
> **Figure 89.** SDA Recovery with 6 SCL Clocks. See source PDF page 1003.

#### 12.2.13.2. SCL line is stuck at LOW

In the unlikely event (due to an electric failure of a circuit) where the clock (SCL) is stuck to LOW, there is no effective
method to overcome this problem. Instead, reset the bus using the hardware reset signal.

### 12.2.14. IC_CLK frequency configuration

When the DW_apb_i2c is configured as a Standard (SS), Fast (FS), or Fast-Mode Plus (FM+), the *CNT registers must be set
before any I2C bus transaction can take place in order to ensure proper I/O timing. The *CNT registers are:
- IC_SS_SCL_HCNT
- IC_SS_SCL_LCNT
- IC_FS_SCL_HCNT
- IC_FS_SCL_LCNT
> **NOTE**
The tBUF timing and setup/hold time of START, STOP and RESTART registers uses *HCNT/*LCNT register settings for
the corresponding speed mode.

> **NOTE**
It is not necessary to program any of the *CNT registers if the DW_apb_i2c is enabled to operate only as an I2C slave,
since these registers are used only to determine the SCL timing requirements for operation as an I2C master.
Table 1052 lists the derivation of I2C timing parameters from the *CNT programming registers.
Table 1052. Derivation
Timing Parameter                Symbol                          Standard Speed                  Fast Speed / Fast Speed Plus
of I2C Timing
Parameters from
LOW period of the SCL clock     tLOW                            IC_SS_SCL_LCNT                  IC_FS_SCL_LCNT
*CNT Registers
HIGH period of the SCL clock tHIGH                              IC_SS_SCL_HCNT                  IC_FS_SCL_HCNT
Setup time for a repeated       tSU;STA                         IC_SS_SCL_LCNT                  IC_FS_SCL_HCNT
START condition
Hold time (repeated) START tHD;STA                              IC_SS_SCL_HCNT                  IC_FS_SCL_HCNT
condition
Setup time for STOP             tSU;STO                         IC_SS_SCL_HCNT                  IC_FS_SCL_HCNT
condition
Bus free time between a         tBUF                            IC_SS_SCL_LCNT                  IC_FS_SCL_LCNT
STOP and a START
condition
Spike length                    tSP                             IC_FS_SPKLEN                    IC_FS_SPKLEN
Data hold time                  tHD;DAT                         IC_SDA_HOLD                     IC_SDA_HOLD
Data setup time                 tSU;DAT                         IC_SDA_SETUP                    IC_SDA_SETUP

#### 12.2.14.1. Minimum high and low counts in SS, FS, and FM+ modes.

When the DW_apb_i2c operates as an I2C master, in both transmit and receive transfers:
- IC_SS_SCL_LCNT and IC_FS_SCL_LCNT register values must be larger than IC_FS_SPKLEN + 7.
- IC_SS_SCL_HCNT and IC_FS_SCL_HCNT register values must be larger than IC_FS_SPKLEN + 5.
Details regarding the DW_apb_i2c high and low counts are as follows:
- The minimum value of IC_*_SPKLEN + 7 for the *_LCNT registers is due to the time required for the DW_apb_i2c to drive
SDA after a negative edge of SCL.
- The minimum value of IC_*_SPKLEN + 5 for the *_HCNT registers is due to the time required for the DW_apb_i2c to
sample SDA during the high period of SCL.
- The DW_apb_i2c adds one cycle to the programmed *_LCNT value in order to generate the low period of the SCL clock;
this is due to the counting logic for SCL low counting to (*_LCNT + 1).
- The DW_apb_i2c adds IC_*_SPKLEN + 7 cycles to the programmed *_HCNT value in order to generate the high period of
the SCL clock, due to the following factors:
- The counting logic for SCL high counts to (*_HCNT + 1).
- The digital filtering applied to the SCL line incurs a delay of SPKLEN + 2 ic_clk cycles, where SPKLEN is
IC_FS_SPKLEN if the component is operating in SS or FS.
- Whenever SCL is driven one to zero by the DW_apb_i2c (completing the SCL high time) an internal logic latency of
three ic_clk cycles is incurred. Consequently, the minimum SCL low time of which the DW_apb_i2c is capable is
nine ic_clk periods (7 + 1 + 1), while the minimum SCL high time is thirteen ic_clk periods (6 + 1 + 3 + 3).

> **NOTE**
The total high time and low time of SCL generated by the DW_apb_i2c master is also influenced by the rise time and fall
time of the SCL line, as shown in the illustration and equations in Figure 90. SCL rise and fall time parameters vary
depending on external factors such as:
- Characteristics of the IO driver
- Pull-up resistor value
- Total capacitance on SCL line
These characteristics are beyond the control of the DW_apb_i2c.
> **Figure 90.** Impact of SCL Rise Time and Fall Time on Generated SCL. See source PDF page 1005.

#### 12.2.14.2. Minimum IC_CLK frequency

This section describes the minimum ic_clk frequencies that the DW_apb_i2c supports for each speed mode, and the
associated high and low count values. In slave mode, IC_SDA_HOLD (Thd;dat) and IC_SDA_SETUP (Tsu:dat) need to be
programmed to satisfy the I2C protocol timing requirements. The following examples are for the case where
IC_FS_SPKLEN is programmed to two.

#### 12.2.14.2.1. Standard Mode (SM), Fast Mode (FM), and Fast Mode Plus (FM+)

This section details how to derive a minimum ic_clk value for standard and fast modes of the DW_apb_i2c. Although the
following method shows how to do fast mode calculations, you can also use the same method in order to do
calculations for standard mode and fast mode plus.
> **NOTE**
The following computations do not consider the SCL_Rise_time and SCL_Fall_time.
Given conditions and calculations for the minimum DW_apb_i2c ic_clk value in fast mode:
- Fast mode has data rate of 400 kb/s; implies SCL period of 1/400 kHz = 2.5μs
- Minimum hcnt value of 14 as a seed value; IC_HCNT_FS = 14
- Protocol minimum SCL high and low times:
- MIN_SCL_LOWtime_FS = 1300 ns
- MIN_SCL_HIGHtime_FS = 600 ns
Derived equations:

SCL_PERIOD_FS / (IC_HCNT_FS + IC_LCNT_FS) = IC_CLK_PERIOD
IC_LCNT_FS × IC_CLK_PERIOD = MIN_SCL_LOWtime_FS
Combined, the previous equations produce the following:
IC_LCNT_FS × (SCL_PERIOD_FS / (IC_LCNT_FS + IC_HCNT_FS) ) = MIN_SCL_LOWtime_FS
Solving for IC_LCNT_FS:
IC_LCNT_FS × (2.5μs / (IC_LCNT_FS + 14) ) = 1.3μs
The previous equation gives:
IC_LCNT_FS = roundup(15.166) = 16
These calculations produce IC_LCNT_FS = 16 and IC_HCNT_FS = 14, giving an ic_clk value of:
2.5μs / (16 + 14) = 83.3ns = 12 MHz
Testing these results shows that protocol requirements are satisfied.
Table 1053 lists the minimum ic_clk values for all modes with high and low count values.
Table 1053. ic_clk in
Speed Mode     ic_clkfreq   Minimum       SCL Low Time SCL Low      SCL Low Time SCL High     SCL High     SCL High
Relation to High and
(MHz)        Value of      in `ic_clk`s   Program                  Time in     Program      Time
Low Counts
IC_*_SPKLEN                  Value                    `ic_clk`s   Value
SS             2.7          1             13             12         4.7μs         14          6            5.2μs
FS             12.0         1             16             15         1.33μs        14          6            1.16μs
FM+            32           2             16             15         500 ns        16          7            500 ns
- The IC_*_SCL_LCNT and IC_*_SCL_HCNT registers are programmed using the SCL low and high program values in Table
1053, which are calculated using SCL low count minus one, and SCL high counts minus eight, respectively. The
values in Table 1053 are based on IC_SDA_RX_HOLD = 0. The maximum IC_SDA_RX_HOLD value depends on the IC_*CNT
registers in Master mode.
- In order to compute the HCNT and LCNT considering RC timings, use the following equations:
- IC_HCNT_* = [(HCNT + IC_*_SPKLEN + 7) * ic_clk] + SCL_Fall_time
- IC_LCNT_* = [(LCNT + 1) * ic_clk] - SCL_Fall_time + SCL_Rise_time

#### 12.2.14.3. Calculating high and low counts

The calculations below show how to calculate SCL high and low counts for each speed mode in the DW_apb_i2c. For the
calculations to work, the ic_clk frequencies used must not be less than the minimum ic_clk frequencies specified in
Table 1053.
The default ic_clk period value is set to 100 ns, so default SCL high and low count values are calculated for each speed

mode based on this clock. These values need updating according to the guidelines below.
The equation to calculate the proper number of ic_clk signals required for setting the proper SCL clocks high and low
times is as follows:
IC_xCNT = (ROUNDUP(MIN_SCL_xxxtime*OSCFREQ,0))
MIN_SCL_HIGHtime = Minimum High Period
MIN_SCL_HIGHtime =     4000ns for 100kb/s,
600ns for 400kb/s,
260ns for 1000kb/s,
MIN_SCL_LOWtime = Minimum Low Period
MIN_SCL_LOWtime =      4700ns for 100kb/s,
1300ns for 400kb/s,
500ns for 1000kb/s,
OSCFREQ = ic_clk Clock Frequency (Hz).
For example:
OSCFREQ = 100MHz
I2Cmode = fast, 400kb/s
MIN_SCL_HIGHtime = 600ns.
MIN_SCL_LOWtime = 1300ns.
IC_xCNT = (ROUNDUP(MIN_SCL_HIGH_LOWtime*OSCFREQ,0))
IC_HCNT = (ROUNDUP(600ns * 100MHz,0))
IC_HCNTSCL PERIOD = 60
IC_LCNT = (ROUNDUP(1300ns * 100MHz,0))
IC_LCNTSCL PERIOD = 130
Actual MIN_SCL_HIGHtime = 60*(1/100MHz) = 600ns
Actual MIN_SCL_LOWtime = 130*(1/100MHz) = 1300ns

### 12.2.15. DMA controller interface

The DW_apb_i2c has built-in DMA capability; it has a handshaking interface to the DMA Controller to request and control
transfers. The APB bus is used to perform data transfers to and from the DMA. DMA transfers use single accesses,
since the data rate is relatively low.

#### 12.2.15.1. Enabling the DMA controller interface

To enable the DMA Controller interface on the DW_apb_i2c, you must write the DMA Control Register (IC_DMA_CR).
Writing a one into the TDMAE bit field of IC_DMA_CR register enables the DW_apb_i2c transmit handshaking interface.
Writing a one into the RDMAE bit field of the IC_DMA_CR register enables the DW_apb_i2c receive handshaking interface.

#### 12.2.15.2. Overview of operation

The DMA Controller is programmed with the number of data items (transfer count) that are to be transmitted or
received by DW_apb_i2c.
The transfer is broken into single transfers on the bus, each initiated by a request from the DW_apb_i2c.

For example, where the transfer count programmed into the DMA Controller is four. The DMA transfer consists of a
series of four single transactions. If the DW_apb_i2c makes a transmit request to this channel, a single data item is written
to the DW_apb_i2c TX FIFO. Similarly, if the DW_apb_i2c makes a receive request to this channel, a single data item is read
from the DW_apb_i2c RX FIFO. Four separate requests must be made to this DMA channel before all four data items are
written or read.

#### 12.2.15.3. Watermark levels

In DW_apb_i2c the registers for setting watermarks to allow DMA bursts do not need be set to anything other than their
reset value. Specifically, IC_DMA_TDLR and IC_DMA_RDLR can be left at reset values of zero. This is because only
single transfers are needed due to the low bandwidth of I2C relative to system bandwidth. Because the DMA controller
normally has the highest priority on the system bus, transfers complete quickly.

### 12.2.16. Operation of interrupt registers

Table 1054 lists the operation of the DW_apb_i2c interrupt registers and how they are set and cleared. Some bits are set
by hardware and cleared by software, whereas other bits are set and cleared by hardware.
Table 1054. Clearing
Interrupt Bit Fields                      Set by Hardware/Cleared by Software       Set and Cleared by Hardware
and Setting of
Interrupt Registers
RESTART_DET                               Y                                         N
GEN_CALL                                  Y                                         N
START_DET                                 Y                                         N
STOP_DET                                  Y                                         N
ACTIVITY                                  Y                                         N
RX_DONE                                   Y                                         N
TX_ABRT                                   Y                                         N
RD_REQ                                    Y                                         N
TX_EMPTY                                  N                                         Y
TX_OVER                                   Y                                         N
RX_FULL                                   N                                         Y
RX_OVER                                   Y                                         N
RX_UNDER                                  Y                                         N

### 12.2.17. List of registers

The I2C0 and I2C1 registers start at base addresses of 0x40090000 and 0x40098000 respectively (defined as I2C0_BASE and
I2C1_BASE in SDK).

> **NOTE**
You may see references to configuration constants in the I2C register descriptions; these are fixed values, set at
hardware design time. A full list of their values can be found in i2c.h in the pico-sdk GitHub repository.
Table 1055. List of I2C
Offset       Name                                      Info
registers
0x00         IC_CON                                    I2C Control Register
0x04         IC_TAR                                    I2C Target Address Register
0x08         IC_SAR                                    I2C Slave Address Register
0x10         IC_DATA_CMD                               I2C Rx/Tx Data Buffer and Command Register
0x14         IC_SS_SCL_HCNT                            Standard Speed I2C Clock SCL High Count Register
0x18         IC_SS_SCL_LCNT                            Standard Speed I2C Clock SCL Low Count Register
0x1c         IC_FS_SCL_HCNT                            Fast Mode or Fast Mode Plus I2C Clock SCL High Count Register
0x20         IC_FS_SCL_LCNT                            Fast Mode or Fast Mode Plus I2C Clock SCL Low Count Register
0x2c         IC_INTR_STAT                              I2C Interrupt Status Register
0x30         IC_INTR_MASK                              I2C Interrupt Mask Register
0x34         IC_RAW_INTR_STAT                          I2C Raw Interrupt Status Register
0x38         IC_RX_TL                                  I2C Receive FIFO Threshold Register
0x3c         IC_TX_TL                                  I2C Transmit FIFO Threshold Register
0x40         IC_CLR_INTR                               Clear Combined and Individual Interrupt Register
0x44         IC_CLR_RX_UNDER                           Clear RX_UNDER Interrupt Register
0x48         IC_CLR_RX_OVER                            Clear RX_OVER Interrupt Register
0x4c         IC_CLR_TX_OVER                            Clear TX_OVER Interrupt Register
0x50         IC_CLR_RD_REQ                             Clear RD_REQ Interrupt Register
0x54         IC_CLR_TX_ABRT                            Clear TX_ABRT Interrupt Register
0x58         IC_CLR_RX_DONE                            Clear RX_DONE Interrupt Register
0x5c         IC_CLR_ACTIVITY                           Clear ACTIVITY Interrupt Register
0x60         IC_CLR_STOP_DET                           Clear STOP_DET Interrupt Register
0x64         IC_CLR_START_DET                          Clear START_DET Interrupt Register
0x68         IC_CLR_GEN_CALL                           Clear GEN_CALL Interrupt Register
0x6c         IC_ENABLE                                 I2C ENABLE Register
0x70         IC_STATUS                                 I2C STATUS Register
0x74         IC_TXFLR                                  I2C Transmit FIFO Level Register
0x78         IC_RXFLR                                  I2C Receive FIFO Level Register
0x7c         IC_SDA_HOLD                               I2C SDA Hold Time Length Register
0x80         IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE                         I2C Transmit Abort Source Register
0x84         IC_SLV_DATA_NACK_ONLY                     Generate Slave Data NACK Register
0x88         IC_DMA_CR                                 DMA Control Register

Offset          Name                                     Info
0x8c            IC_DMA_TDLR                              DMA Transmit Data Level Register
0x90            IC_DMA_RDLR                              DMA Transmit Data Level Register
0x94            IC_SDA_SETUP                             I2C SDA Setup Register
0x98            IC_ACK_GENERAL_CALL                      I2C ACK General Call Register
0x9c            IC_ENABLE_STATUS                         I2C Enable Status Register
0xa0            IC_FS_SPKLEN                             I2C SS, FS or FM+ spike suppression limit
0xa8            IC_CLR_RESTART_DET                       Clear RESTART_DET Interrupt Register
0xf4            IC_COMP_PARAM_1                          Component Parameter Register 1
0xf8            IC_COMP_VERSION                          I2C Component Version Register
0xfc            IC_COMP_TYPE                             I2C Component Type Register
I2C: IC_CON Register
Offset: 0x00
Description
I2C Control Register. This register can be written only when the DW_apb_i2c is disabled, which corresponds to the
IC_ENABLE[0] register being set to 0. Writes at other times have no effect.
Read/Write Access: - bit 10 is read only. - bit 11 is read only - bit 16 is read only - bit 17 is read only - bits 18 and 19 are
read only.
Table 1056. IC_CON
Bits         Description                                                                        Type       Reset
Register
31:11        Reserved.                                                                          -          -
10           STOP_DET_IF_MASTER_ACTIVE: Master issues the STOP_DET interrupt                    RO         0x0
irrespective of whether master is active or not
9            RX_FIFO_FULL_HLD_CTRL: This bit controls whether DW_apb_i2c should hold            RW         0x0
the bus when the Rx FIFO is physically full to its RX_BUFFER_DEPTH, as
described in the IC_RX_FULL_HLD_BUS_EN parameter.
Reset value: 0x0.
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: Overflow when RX_FIFO is full
0x1 → ENABLED: Hold bus when RX_FIFO is full
8            TX_EMPTY_CTRL: This bit controls the generation of the TX_EMPTY interrupt, RW                 0x0
as described in the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0.
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: Default behaviour of TX_EMPTY interrupt
0x1 → ENABLED: Controlled generation of TX_EMPTY interrupt

Bits   Description                                                                          Type   Reset
7      STOP_DET_IFADDRESSED: In slave mode: - 1’b1: issues the STOP_DET                     RW     0x0
interrupt only when it is addressed. - 1’b0: issues the STOP_DET irrespective of
whether it’s addressed or not. Reset value: 0x0
NOTE: During a general call address, this slave does not issue the STOP_DET
interrupt if STOP_DET_IF_ADDRESSED = 1’b1, even if the slave responds to the
general call address by generating ACK. The STOP_DET interrupt is generated
only when the transmitted address matches the slave address (SAR).
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: slave issues STOP_DET intr always
0x1 → ENABLED: slave issues STOP_DET intr only if addressed
6      IC_SLAVE_DISABLE: This bit controls whether I2C has its slave disabled,              RW     0x1
which means once the presetn signal is applied, then this bit is set and the
slave is disabled.
If this bit is set (slave is disabled), DW_apb_i2c functions only as a master and
does not perform any action that requires a slave.
NOTE: Software should ensure that if this bit is written with 0, then bit 0 should
also be written with a 0.
Enumerated values:
0x0 → SLAVE_ENABLED: Slave mode is enabled
0x1 → SLAVE_DISABLED: Slave mode is disabled
5      IC_RESTART_EN: Determines whether RESTART conditions may be sent when RW                    0x1
acting as a master. Some older slaves do not support handling RESTART
conditions; however, RESTART conditions are used in several DW_apb_i2c
operations. When RESTART is disabled, the master is prohibited from
performing the following functions: - Sending a START BYTE - Performing any
high-speed mode operation - High-speed mode operation - Performing
direction changes in combined format mode - Performing a read operation
with a 10-bit address By replacing RESTART condition followed by a STOP and
a subsequent START condition, split operations are broken down into multiple
DW_apb_i2c transfers. If the above operations are performed, it will result in
setting bit 6 (TX_ABRT) of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: ENABLED
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: Master restart disabled
0x1 → ENABLED: Master restart enabled
4      IC_10BITADDR_MASTER: Controls whether the DW_apb_i2c starts its                      RW     0x0
transfers in 7- or 10-bit addressing mode when acting as a master. - 0: 7-bit
addressing - 1: 10-bit addressing
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ADDR_7BITS: Master 7Bit addressing mode
0x1 → ADDR_10BITS: Master 10Bit addressing mode

Bits        Description                                                                       Type   Reset
3           IC_10BITADDR_SLAVE: When acting as a slave, this bit controls whether the         RW     0x0
DW_apb_i2c responds to 7- or 10-bit addresses. - 0: 7-bit addressing. The
DW_apb_i2c ignores transactions that involve 10-bit addressing; for 7-bit
addressing, only the lower 7 bits of the IC_SAR register are compared. - 1: 10-
bit addressing. The DW_apb_i2c responds to only 10-bit addressing transfers
that match the full 10 bits of the IC_SAR register.
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ADDR_7BITS: Slave 7Bit addressing
0x1 → ADDR_10BITS: Slave 10Bit addressing
2:1         SPEED: These bits control at which speed the DW_apb_i2c operates; its             RW     0x2
setting is relevant only if one is operating the DW_apb_i2c in master mode.
Hardware protects against illegal values being programmed by software.
These bits must be programmed appropriately for slave mode also, as it is
used to capture correct value of spike filter as per the speed mode.
This register should be programmed only with a value in the range of 1 to
IC_MAX_SPEED_MODE; otherwise, hardware updates this register with the
value of IC_MAX_SPEED_MODE.
1: standard mode (100 kbit/s)
2: fast mode (<=400 kbit/s) or fast mode plus (<=1000Kbit/s)
3: high speed mode (3.4 Mbit/s)
Note: This field is not applicable when IC_ULTRA_FAST_MODE=1
Enumerated values:
0x1 → STANDARD: Standard Speed mode of operation
0x2 → FAST: Fast or Fast Plus mode of operation
0x3 → HIGH: High Speed mode of operation
0           MASTER_MODE: This bit controls whether the DW_apb_i2c master is enabled. RW              0x1
NOTE: Software should ensure that if this bit is written with '1' then bit 6
should also be written with a '1'.
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: Master mode is disabled
0x1 → ENABLED: Master mode is enabled
I2C: IC_TAR Register
Offset: 0x04
Description
I2C Target Address Register
This register is 12 bits wide, and bits 31:12 are reserved. This register can be written to only when IC_ENABLE[0] is set
to 0.
Note: If the software or application is aware that the DW_apb_i2c is not using the TAR address for the pending

commands in the Tx FIFO, then it is possible to update the TAR address even while the Tx FIFO has entries
(IC_STATUS[2]= 0). - It is not necessary to perform any write to this register if DW_apb_i2c is enabled as an I2C slave
only.
Table 1057. IC_TAR
Bits        Description                                                                       Type   Reset
Register
31:12       Reserved.                                                                         -      -
11          SPECIAL: This bit indicates whether software performs a Device-ID or General      RW     0x0
Call or START BYTE command. - 0: ignore bit 10 GC_OR_START and use
IC_TAR normally - 1: perform special I2C command as specified in Device_ID
or GC_OR_START bit Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: Disables programming of GENERAL_CALL or START_BYTE
transmission
0x1 → ENABLED: Enables programming of GENERAL_CALL or START_BYTE
transmission
10          GC_OR_START: If bit 11 (SPECIAL) is set to 1 and bit 13(Device-ID) is set to 0,   RW     0x0
then this bit indicates whether a General Call or START byte command is to be
performed by the DW_apb_i2c. - 0: General Call Address - after issuing a
General Call, only writes may be performed. Attempting to issue a read
command results in setting bit 6 (TX_ABRT) of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT
register. The DW_apb_i2c remains in General Call mode until the SPECIAL bit
value (bit 11) is cleared. - 1: START BYTE Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → GENERAL_CALL: GENERAL_CALL byte transmission
0x1 → START_BYTE: START byte transmission
9:0         IC_TAR: This is the target address for any master transaction. When               RW     0x055
transmitting a General Call, these bits are ignored. To generate a START BYTE,
the CPU needs to write only once into these bits.
If the IC_TAR and IC_SAR are the same, loopback exists but the FIFOs are
shared between master and slave, so full loopback is not feasible. Only one
direction loopback mode is supported (simplex), not duplex. A master cannot
transmit to itself; it can transmit to only a slave.
I2C: IC_SAR Register
Offset: 0x08
Description
I2C Slave Address Register
Table 1058. IC_SAR
Bits        Description                                                                       Type   Reset
Register
31:10       Reserved.                                                                         -      -

Bits        Description                                                                        Type   Reset
9:0         IC_SAR: The IC_SAR holds the slave address when the I2C is operating as a          RW     0x055
slave. For 7-bit addressing, only IC_SAR[6:0] is used.
This register can be written only when the I2C interface is disabled, which
corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0] register being set to 0. Writes at other times
have no effect.
Note: The default values cannot be any of the reserved address locations: that
is, 0x00 to 0x07, or 0x78 to 0x7f. The correct operation of the device is not
guaranteed if you program the IC_SAR or IC_TAR to a reserved value. Refer to
Table 1051 for a complete list of these reserved values.
I2C: IC_DATA_CMD Register
Offset: 0x10
Description
I2C Rx/Tx Data Buffer and Command Register; this is the register the CPU writes to when filling the TX FIFO and the
CPU reads from when retrieving bytes from RX FIFO.
The size of the register changes as follows:
Write: - 11 bits when IC_EMPTYFIFO_HOLD_MASTER_EN=1 - 9 bits when IC_EMPTYFIFO_HOLD_MASTER_EN=0 Read: -
12 bits when IC_FIRST_DATA_BYTE_STATUS = 1 - 8 bits when IC_FIRST_DATA_BYTE_STATUS = 0 Note: In order for the
DW_apb_i2c to continue acknowledging reads, a read command should be written for every byte that is to be received;
otherwise the DW_apb_i2c will stop acknowledging.
Table 1059.
Bits        Description                                                                        Type   Reset
IC_DATA_CMD
Register
31:12       Reserved.                                                                          -      -
11          FIRST_DATA_BYTE: Indicates the first data byte received after the address          RO     0x0
phase for receive transfer in Master receiver or Slave receiver mode.
Reset value : 0x0
NOTE: In case of APB_DATA_WIDTH=8,
1. The user has to perform two APB Reads to IC_DATA_CMD in order to get
status on 11 bit.
2. In order to read the 11 bit, the user has to perform the first data byte read
[7:0] (offset 0x10) and then perform the second read [15:8] (offset 0x11) in
order to know the status of 11 bit (whether the data received in previous read
is a first data byte or not).
3. The 11th bit is an optional read field, user can ignore 2nd byte read [15:8]
(offset 0x11) if not interested in FIRST_DATA_BYTE status.
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: Sequential data byte received
0x1 → ACTIVE: Non sequential data byte received

Bits   Description                                                                          Type   Reset
10     RESTART: This bit controls whether a RESTART is issued before the byte is            SC     0x0
sent or received.
1 - If IC_RESTART_EN is 1, a RESTART is issued before the data is
sent/received (according to the value of CMD), regardless of whether or not
the transfer direction is changing from the previous command; if
IC_RESTART_EN is 0, a STOP followed by a START is issued instead.
0 - If IC_RESTART_EN is 1, a RESTART is issued only if the transfer direction is
changing from the previous command; if IC_RESTART_EN is 0, a STOP
followed by a START is issued instead.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLE: Don’t Issue RESTART before this command
0x1 → ENABLE: Issue RESTART before this command
9      STOP: This bit controls whether a STOP is issued after the byte is sent or           SC     0x0
received.
- 1 - STOP is issued after this byte, regardless of whether or not the Tx FIFO is
empty. If the Tx FIFO is not empty, the master immediately tries to start a new
transfer by issuing a START and arbitrating for the bus. - 0 - STOP is not
issued after this byte, regardless of whether or not the Tx FIFO is empty. If the
Tx FIFO is not empty, the master continues the current transfer by
sending/receiving data bytes according to the value of the CMD bit. If the Tx
FIFO is empty, the master holds the SCL line low and stalls the bus until a new
command is available in the Tx FIFO. Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLE: Don’t Issue STOP after this command
0x1 → ENABLE: Issue STOP after this command
8      CMD: This bit controls whether a read or a write is performed. This bit does         SC     0x0
not control the direction when the DW_apb_i2con acts as a slave. It controls
only the direction when it acts as a master.
When a command is entered in the TX FIFO, this bit distinguishes the write
and read commands. In slave-receiver mode, this bit is a 'don’t care' because
writes to this register are not required. In slave-transmitter mode, a '0'
indicates that the data in IC_DATA_CMD is to be transmitted.
When programming this bit, you should remember the following: attempting to
perform a read operation after a General Call command has been sent results
in a TX_ABRT interrupt (bit 6 of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register), unless bit 11
(SPECIAL) in the IC_TAR register has been cleared. If a '1' is written to this bit
after receiving a RD_REQ interrupt, then a TX_ABRT interrupt occurs.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → WRITE: Master Write Command

Bits        Description                                                                      Type   Reset
0x1 → READ: Master Read Command
7:0         DAT: This register contains the data to be transmitted or received on the I2C    RW     0x00
bus. If you are writing to this register and want to perform a read, bits 7:0
(DAT) are ignored by the DW_apb_i2c. However, when you read this register,
these bits return the value of data received on the DW_apb_i2c interface.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_SS_SCL_HCNT Register
Offset: 0x14
Description
Standard Speed I2C Clock SCL High Count Register
Table 1060.
Bits        Description                                                                      Type   Reset
IC_SS_SCL_HCNT
Register
31:16       Reserved.                                                                        -      -
15:0        IC_SS_SCL_HCNT: This register must be set before any I2C bus transaction         RW     0x0028
can take place to ensure proper I/O timing. This register sets the SCL clock
high-period count for standard speed. For more information, refer to 'IC_CLK
Frequency Configuration'.
This register can be written only when the I2C interface is disabled which
corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0] register being set to 0. Writes at other times
have no effect.
The minimum valid value is 6; hardware prevents values less than this being
written, and if attempted results in 6 being set. For designs with
APB_DATA_WIDTH = 8, the order of programming is important to ensure the
correct operation of the DW_apb_i2c. The lower byte must be programmed
first. Then the upper byte is programmed.
NOTE: This register must not be programmed to a value higher than 65525,
because DW_apb_i2c uses a 16-bit counter to flag an I2C bus idle condition
when this counter reaches a value of IC_SS_SCL_HCNT + 10.
I2C: IC_SS_SCL_LCNT Register
Offset: 0x18
Description
Standard Speed I2C Clock SCL Low Count Register
Table 1061.
Bits        Description                                                                      Type   Reset
IC_SS_SCL_LCNT
Register
31:16       Reserved.                                                                        -      -

Bits      Description                                                                      Type   Reset
15:0      IC_SS_SCL_LCNT: This register must be set before any I2C bus transaction         RW     0x002f
can take place to ensure proper I/O timing. This register sets the SCL clock
low period count for standard speed. For more information, refer to 'IC_CLK
Frequency Configuration'
This register can be written only when the I2C interface is disabled which
corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0] register being set to 0. Writes at other times
have no effect.
The minimum valid value is 8; hardware prevents values less than this being
written, and if attempted, results in 8 being set. For designs with
APB_DATA_WIDTH = 8, the order of programming is important to ensure the
correct operation of DW_apb_i2c. The lower byte must be programmed first,
and then the upper byte is programmed.
I2C: IC_FS_SCL_HCNT Register
Offset: 0x1c
Description
Fast Mode or Fast Mode Plus I2C Clock SCL High Count Register
Table 1062.
Bits      Description                                                                      Type   Reset
IC_FS_SCL_HCNT
Register
31:16     Reserved.                                                                        -      -
15:0      IC_FS_SCL_HCNT: This register must be set before any I2C bus transaction         RW     0x0006
can take place to ensure proper I/O timing. This register sets the SCL clock
high-period count for fast mode or fast mode plus. It is used in high-speed
mode to send the Master Code and START BYTE or General CALL. For more
information, refer to 'IC_CLK Frequency Configuration'.
This register goes away and becomes read-only returning 0s if
IC_MAX_SPEED_MODE = standard. This register can be written only when the
I2C interface is disabled, which corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0] register
being set to 0. Writes at other times have no effect.
The minimum valid value is 6; hardware prevents values less than this being
written, and if attempted results in 6 being set. For designs with
APB_DATA_WIDTH == 8 the order of programming is important to ensure the
correct operation of the DW_apb_i2c. The lower byte must be programmed
first. Then the upper byte is programmed.
I2C: IC_FS_SCL_LCNT Register
Offset: 0x20
Description
Fast Mode or Fast Mode Plus I2C Clock SCL Low Count Register
Table 1063.
Bits      Description                                                                      Type   Reset
IC_FS_SCL_LCNT
Register
31:16     Reserved.                                                                        -      -

Bits        Description                                                                      Type   Reset
15:0        IC_FS_SCL_LCNT: This register must be set before any I2C bus transaction         RW     0x000d
can take place to ensure proper I/O timing. This register sets the SCL clock
low period count for fast speed. It is used in high-speed mode to send the
Master Code and START BYTE or General CALL. For more information, refer to
'IC_CLK Frequency Configuration'.
This register goes away and becomes read-only returning 0s if
IC_MAX_SPEED_MODE = standard.
This register can be written only when the I2C interface is disabled, which
corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0] register being set to 0. Writes at other times
have no effect.
The minimum valid value is 8; hardware prevents values less than this being
written, and if attempted results in 8 being set. For designs with
APB_DATA_WIDTH = 8 the order of programming is important to ensure the
correct operation of the DW_apb_i2c. The lower byte must be programmed
first. Then the upper byte is programmed. If the value is less than 8 then the
count value gets changed to 8.
I2C: IC_INTR_STAT Register
Offset: 0x2c
Description
I2C Interrupt Status Register
Each bit in this register has a corresponding mask bit in the IC_INTR_MASK register. These bits are cleared by reading
the matching interrupt clear register. The unmasked raw versions of these bits are available in the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT
register.
Table 1064.
Bits        Description                                                                      Type   Reset
IC_INTR_STAT
Register
31:13       Reserved.                                                                        -      -
12          R_RESTART_DET: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of                RO     0x0
R_RESTART_DET bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_RESTART_DET interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_RESTART_DET interrupt is active
11          R_GEN_CALL: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of                   RO     0x0
R_GEN_CALL bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_GEN_CALL interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_GEN_CALL interrupt is active

Bits   Description                                                             Type   Reset
10     R_START_DET: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of         RO     0x0
R_START_DET bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_START_DET interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_START_DET interrupt is active
9      R_STOP_DET: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of          RO     0x0
R_STOP_DET bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_STOP_DET interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_STOP_DET interrupt is active
8      R_ACTIVITY: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of          RO     0x0
R_ACTIVITY bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_ACTIVITY interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_ACTIVITY interrupt is active
7      R_RX_DONE: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of           RO     0x0
R_RX_DONE bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_RX_DONE interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_RX_DONE interrupt is active
6      R_TX_ABRT: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of R_TX_ABRT RO     0x0
bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_TX_ABRT interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_TX_ABRT interrupt is active
5      R_RD_REQ: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of R_RD_REQ   RO     0x0
bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_RD_REQ interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_RD_REQ interrupt is active

Bits       Description                                                                     Type      Reset
4          R_TX_EMPTY: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of                  RO        0x0
R_TX_EMPTY bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_TX_EMPTY interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_TX_EMPTY interrupt is active
3          R_TX_OVER: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of R_TX_OVER RO                0x0
bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_TX_OVER interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_TX_OVER interrupt is active
2          R_RX_FULL: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of R_RX_FULL         RO        0x0
bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_RX_FULL interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_RX_FULL interrupt is active
1          R_RX_OVER: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of                   RO        0x0
R_RX_OVER bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: R_RX_OVER interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: R_RX_OVER interrupt is active
0          R_RX_UNDER: See IC_RAW_INTR_STAT for a detailed description of                  RO        0x0
R_RX_UNDER bit.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: RX_UNDER interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: RX_UNDER interrupt is active
I2C: IC_INTR_MASK Register
Offset: 0x30
Description
I2C Interrupt Mask Register.
These bits mask their corresponding interrupt status bits. This register is active low; a value of 0 masks the interrupt,
whereas a value of 1 unmasks the interrupt.

Table 1065.
Bits    Description                                                             Type   Reset
IC_INTR_MASK
Register
31:13   Reserved.                                                               -      -
12      M_RESTART_DET: This bit masks the R_RESTART_DET interrupt in            RW     0x0
IC_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: RESTART_DET interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: RESTART_DET interrupt is unmasked
11      M_GEN_CALL: This bit masks the R_GEN_CALL interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT     RW     0x1
register.
Reset value: 0x1
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: GEN_CALL interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: GEN_CALL interrupt is unmasked
10      M_START_DET: This bit masks the R_START_DET interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT   RW     0x0
register.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: START_DET interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: START_DET interrupt is unmasked
9       M_STOP_DET: This bit masks the R_STOP_DET interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT     RW     0x0
register.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: STOP_DET interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: STOP_DET interrupt is unmasked
8       M_ACTIVITY: This bit masks the R_ACTIVITY interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT     RW     0x0
register.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: ACTIVITY interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: ACTIVITY interrupt is unmasked
7       M_RX_DONE: This bit masks the R_RX_DONE interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT       RW     0x1
register.
Reset value: 0x1
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: RX_DONE interrupt is masked

Bits   Description                                                                 Type   Reset
0x1 → DISABLED: RX_DONE interrupt is unmasked
6      M_TX_ABRT: This bit masks the R_TX_ABRT interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT           RW     0x1
register.
Reset value: 0x1
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: TX_ABORT interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: TX_ABORT interrupt is unmasked
5      M_RD_REQ: This bit masks the R_RD_REQ interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT register.   RW     0x1
Reset value: 0x1
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: RD_REQ interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: RD_REQ interrupt is unmasked
4      M_TX_EMPTY: This bit masks the R_TX_EMPTY interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT         RW     0x1
register.
Reset value: 0x1
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: TX_EMPTY interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: TX_EMPTY interrupt is unmasked
3      M_TX_OVER: This bit masks the R_TX_OVER interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT           RW     0x1
register.
Reset value: 0x1
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: TX_OVER interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: TX_OVER interrupt is unmasked
2      M_RX_FULL: This bit masks the R_RX_FULL interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT           RW     0x1
register.
Reset value: 0x1
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: RX_FULL interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: RX_FULL interrupt is unmasked
1      M_RX_OVER: This bit masks the R_RX_OVER interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT           RW     0x1
register.
Reset value: 0x1
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: RX_OVER interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: RX_OVER interrupt is unmasked

Bits       Description                                                                        Type   Reset
0          M_RX_UNDER: This bit masks the R_RX_UNDER interrupt in IC_INTR_STAT                RW     0x1
register.
Reset value: 0x1
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ENABLED: RX_UNDER interrupt is masked
0x1 → DISABLED: RX_UNDER interrupt is unmasked
I2C: IC_RAW_INTR_STAT Register
Offset: 0x34
Description
I2C Raw Interrupt Status Register
Unlike the IC_INTR_STAT register, these bits are not masked so they always show the true status of the DW_apb_i2c.
Table 1066.
Bits       Description                                                                        Type   Reset
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT
Register
31:13      Reserved.                                                                          -      -
12         RESTART_DET: Indicates whether a RESTART condition has occurred on the             RO     0x0
I2C interface when DW_apb_i2c is operating in Slave mode and the slave is
being addressed. Enabled only when IC_SLV_RESTART_DET_EN=1.
Note: However, in high-speed mode or during a START BYTE transfer, the
RESTART comes before the address field as per the I2C protocol. In this case,
the slave is not the addressed slave when the RESTART is issued, therefore
DW_apb_i2c does not generate the RESTART_DET interrupt.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: RESTART_DET interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: RESTART_DET interrupt is active
11         GEN_CALL: Set only when a General Call address is received and it is               RO     0x0
acknowledged. It stays set until it is cleared either by disabling DW_apb_i2c or
when the CPU reads bit 0 of the IC_CLR_GEN_CALL register. DW_apb_i2c
stores the received data in the Rx buffer.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: GEN_CALL interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: GEN_CALL interrupt is active
10         START_DET: Indicates whether a START or RESTART condition has occurred             RO     0x0
on the I2C interface regardless of whether DW_apb_i2c is operating in slave or
master mode.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:

Bits   Description                                                                          Type   Reset
0x0 → INACTIVE: START_DET interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: START_DET interrupt is active
9      STOP_DET: Indicates whether a STOP condition has occurred on the I2C                 RO     0x0
interface regardless of whether DW_apb_i2c is operating in slave or master
mode.
In Slave Mode: - If IC_CON[7]=1’b1 (STOP_DET_IFADDRESSED), the STOP_DET
interrupt will be issued only if slave is addressed. Note: During a general call
address, this slave does not issue a STOP_DET interrupt if
STOP_DET_IF_ADDRESSED=1’b1, even if the slave responds to the general call
address by generating ACK. The STOP_DET interrupt is generated only when
the transmitted address matches the slave address (SAR). - If IC_CON[7]=1’b0
(STOP_DET_IFADDRESSED), the STOP_DET interrupt is issued irrespective of
whether it is being addressed. In Master Mode: - If IC_CON[10]=1’b1
(STOP_DET_IF_MASTER_ACTIVE),the STOP_DET interrupt will be issued only if
Master is active. - If IC_CON[10]=1’b0 (STOP_DET_IFADDRESSED),the
STOP_DET interrupt will be issued irrespective of whether master is active or
not. Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: STOP_DET interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: STOP_DET interrupt is active
8      ACTIVITY: This bit captures DW_apb_i2c activity and stays set until it is            RO     0x0
cleared. There are four ways to clear it: - Disabling the DW_apb_i2c - Reading
the IC_CLR_ACTIVITY register - Reading the IC_CLR_INTR register - System
reset Once this bit is set, it stays set unless one of the four methods is used to
clear it. Even if the DW_apb_i2c module is idle, this bit remains set until
cleared, indicating that there was activity on the bus.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: RAW_INTR_ACTIVITY interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: RAW_INTR_ACTIVITY interrupt is active
7      RX_DONE: When the DW_apb_i2c is acting as a slave-transmitter, this bit is set RO           0x0
to 1 if the master does not acknowledge a transmitted byte. This occurs on
the last byte of the transmission, indicating that the transmission is done.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: RX_DONE interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: RX_DONE interrupt is active

Bits   Description                                                                             Type   Reset
6      TX_ABRT: This bit indicates if DW_apb_i2c, as an I2C transmitter, is unable to          RO     0x0
complete the intended actions on the contents of the transmit FIFO. This
situation can occur both as an I2C master or an I2C slave, and is referred to as
a 'transmit abort'. When this bit is set to 1, the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register
indicates the reason why the transmit abort takes places.
Note: The DW_apb_i2c flushes/resets/empties the TX_FIFO and RX_FIFO
whenever there is a transmit abort caused by any of the events tracked by the
IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register. The FIFOs remains in this flushed state until
the register IC_CLR_TX_ABRT is read. Once this read is performed, the Tx FIFO
is then ready to accept more data bytes from the APB interface.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: TX_ABRT interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: TX_ABRT interrupt is active
5      RD_REQ: This bit is set to 1 when DW_apb_i2c is acting as a slave and another RO               0x0
I2C master is attempting to read data from DW_apb_i2c. The DW_apb_i2c
holds the I2C bus in a wait state (SCL=0) until this interrupt is serviced, which
means that the slave has been addressed by a remote master that is asking
for data to be transferred. The processor must respond to this interrupt and
then write the requested data to the IC_DATA_CMD register. This bit is set to 0
just after the processor reads the IC_CLR_RD_REQ register.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: RD_REQ interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: RD_REQ interrupt is active
4      TX_EMPTY: The behavior of the TX_EMPTY interrupt status differs based on                RO     0x0
the TX_EMPTY_CTRL selection in the IC_CON register. - When
TX_EMPTY_CTRL = 0: This bit is set to 1 when the transmit buffer is at or
below the threshold value set in the IC_TX_TL register. - When
TX_EMPTY_CTRL = 1: This bit is set to 1 when the transmit buffer is at or
below the threshold value set in the IC_TX_TL register and the transmission of
the address/data from the internal shift register for the most recently popped
command is completed. It is automatically cleared by hardware when the
buffer level goes above the threshold. When IC_ENABLE[0] is set to 0, the TX
FIFO is flushed and held in reset. There the TX FIFO looks like it has no data
within it, so this bit is set to 1, provided there is activity in the master or slave
state machines. When there is no longer any activity, then with ic_en=0, this bit
is set to 0.
Reset value: 0x0.
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: TX_EMPTY interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: TX_EMPTY interrupt is active

Bits   Description                                                                       Type   Reset
3      TX_OVER: Set during transmit if the transmit buffer is filled to                  RO     0x0
IC_TX_BUFFER_DEPTH and the processor attempts to issue another I2C
command by writing to the IC_DATA_CMD register. When the module is
disabled, this bit keeps its level until the master or slave state machines go
into idle, and when ic_en goes to 0, this interrupt is cleared.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: TX_OVER interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: TX_OVER interrupt is active
2      RX_FULL: Set when the receive buffer reaches or goes above the RX_TL              RO     0x0
threshold in the IC_RX_TL register. It is automatically cleared by hardware
when buffer level goes below the threshold. If the module is disabled
(IC_ENABLE[0]=0), the RX FIFO is flushed and held in reset; therefore the RX
FIFO is not full. So this bit is cleared once the IC_ENABLE bit 0 is programmed
with a 0, regardless of the activity that continues.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: RX_FULL interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: RX_FULL interrupt is active
1      RX_OVER: Set if the receive buffer is completely filled to                        RO     0x0
IC_RX_BUFFER_DEPTH and an additional byte is received from an external I2C
device. The DW_apb_i2c acknowledges this, but any data bytes received after
the FIFO is full are lost. If the module is disabled (IC_ENABLE[0]=0), this bit
keeps its level until the master or slave state machines go into idle, and when
ic_en goes to 0, this interrupt is cleared.
Note: If bit 9 of the IC_CON register (RX_FIFO_FULL_HLD_CTRL) is
programmed to HIGH, then the RX_OVER interrupt never occurs, because the
Rx FIFO never overflows.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: RX_OVER interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: RX_OVER interrupt is active
0      RX_UNDER: Set if the processor attempts to read the receive buffer when it is     RO     0x0
empty by reading from the IC_DATA_CMD register. If the module is disabled
(IC_ENABLE[0]=0), this bit keeps its level until the master or slave state
machines go into idle, and when ic_en goes to 0, this interrupt is cleared.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: RX_UNDER interrupt is inactive
0x1 → ACTIVE: RX_UNDER interrupt is active

I2C: IC_RX_TL Register
Offset: 0x38
Description
I2C Receive FIFO Threshold Register
Table 1067. IC_RX_TL
Bits        Description                                                                           Type   Reset
Register
31:8        Reserved.                                                                             -      -
7:0         RX_TL: Receive FIFO Threshold Level.                                                  RW     0x00
Controls the level of entries (or above) that triggers the RX_FULL interrupt (bit
2 in IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register). The valid range is 0-255, with the additional
restriction that hardware does not allow this value to be set to a value larger
than the depth of the buffer. If an attempt is made to do that, the actual value
set will be the maximum depth of the buffer. A value of 0 sets the threshold
for 1 entry, and a value of 255 sets the threshold for 256 entries.
I2C: IC_TX_TL Register
Offset: 0x3c
Description
I2C Transmit FIFO Threshold Register
Table 1068. IC_TX_TL
Bits        Description                                                                           Type   Reset
Register
31:8        Reserved.                                                                             -      -
7:0         TX_TL: Transmit FIFO Threshold Level.                                                 RW     0x00
Controls the level of entries (or below) that trigger the TX_EMPTY interrupt (bit
4 in IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register). The valid range is 0-255, with the additional
restriction that it may not be set to value larger than the depth of the buffer. If
an attempt is made to do that, the actual value set will be the maximum depth
of the buffer. A value of 0 sets the threshold for 0 entries, and a value of 255
sets the threshold for 255 entries.
I2C: IC_CLR_INTR Register
Offset: 0x40
Description
Clear Combined and Individual Interrupt Register

Table 1069.
Bits      Description                                                                       Type   Reset
IC_CLR_INTR Register
31:1      Reserved.                                                                         -      -
0         CLR_INTR: Read this register to clear the combined interrupt, all individual      RO     0x0
interrupts, and the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register. This bit does not clear
hardware clearable interrupts but software clearable interrupts. Refer to Bit 9
of the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register for an exception to clearing
IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_CLR_RX_UNDER Register
Offset: 0x44
Description
Clear RX_UNDER Interrupt Register
Table 1070.
Bits      Description                                                                       Type   Reset
IC_CLR_RX_UNDER
Register
31:1      Reserved.                                                                         -      -
0         CLR_RX_UNDER: Read this register to clear the RX_UNDER interrupt (bit 0) of       RO     0x0
the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_CLR_RX_OVER Register
Offset: 0x48
Description
Clear RX_OVER Interrupt Register
Table 1071.
Bits      Description                                                                       Type   Reset
IC_CLR_RX_OVER
Register
31:1      Reserved.                                                                         -      -
0         CLR_RX_OVER: Read this register to clear the RX_OVER interrupt (bit 1) of the     RO     0x0
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_CLR_TX_OVER Register
Offset: 0x4c
Description
Clear TX_OVER Interrupt Register

Table 1072.
Bits      Description                                                                      Type   Reset
IC_CLR_TX_OVER
Register
31:1      Reserved.                                                                        -      -
0         CLR_TX_OVER: Read this register to clear the TX_OVER interrupt (bit 3) of the    RO     0x0
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_CLR_RD_REQ Register
Offset: 0x50
Description
Clear RD_REQ Interrupt Register
Table 1073.
Bits      Description                                                                      Type   Reset
IC_CLR_RD_REQ
Register
31:1      Reserved.                                                                        -      -
0         CLR_RD_REQ: Read this register to clear the RD_REQ interrupt (bit 5) of the      RO     0x0
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_CLR_TX_ABRT Register
Offset: 0x54
Description
Clear TX_ABRT Interrupt Register
Table 1074.
Bits      Description                                                                      Type   Reset
IC_CLR_TX_ABRT
Register
31:1      Reserved.                                                                        -      -
0         CLR_TX_ABRT: Read this register to clear the TX_ABRT interrupt (bit 6) of the    RO     0x0
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register, and the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register. This also
releases the TX FIFO from the flushed/reset state, allowing more writes to the
TX FIFO. Refer to Bit 9 of the IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE register for an exception
to clearing IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_CLR_RX_DONE Register
Offset: 0x58
Description
Clear RX_DONE Interrupt Register

Table 1075.
Bits      Description                                                                         Type   Reset
IC_CLR_RX_DONE
Register
31:1      Reserved.                                                                           -      -
0         CLR_RX_DONE: Read this register to clear the RX_DONE interrupt (bit 7) of the       RO     0x0
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_CLR_ACTIVITY Register
Offset: 0x5c
Description
Clear ACTIVITY Interrupt Register
Table 1076.
Bits      Description                                                                         Type   Reset
IC_CLR_ACTIVITY
Register
31:1      Reserved.                                                                           -      -
0         CLR_ACTIVITY: Reading this register clears the ACTIVITY interrupt if the I2C is RO         0x0
not active anymore. If the I2C module is still active on the bus, the ACTIVITY
interrupt bit continues to be set. It is automatically cleared by hardware if the
module is disabled and if there is no further activity on the bus. The value read
from this register to get status of the ACTIVITY interrupt (bit 8) of the
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_CLR_STOP_DET Register
Offset: 0x60
Description
Clear STOP_DET Interrupt Register
Table 1077.
Bits      Description                                                                         Type   Reset
IC_CLR_STOP_DET
Register
31:1      Reserved.                                                                           -      -
0         CLR_STOP_DET: Read this register to clear the STOP_DET interrupt (bit 9) of         RO     0x0
the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_CLR_START_DET Register
Offset: 0x64
Description
Clear START_DET Interrupt Register

Table 1078.
Bits      Description                                                                         Type   Reset
IC_CLR_START_DET
Register
31:1      Reserved.                                                                           -      -
0         CLR_START_DET: Read this register to clear the START_DET interrupt (bit 10)         RO     0x0
of the IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_CLR_GEN_CALL Register
Offset: 0x68
Description
Clear GEN_CALL Interrupt Register
Table 1079.
Bits      Description                                                                         Type   Reset
IC_CLR_GEN_CALL
Register
31:1      Reserved.                                                                           -      -
0         CLR_GEN_CALL: Read this register to clear the GEN_CALL interrupt (bit 11) of        RO     0x0
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_ENABLE Register
Offset: 0x6c
Description
I2C Enable Register
Table 1080.
Bits      Description                                                                         Type   Reset
IC_ENABLE Register
31:3      Reserved.                                                                           -      -
2         TX_CMD_BLOCK: In Master mode: - 1’b1: Blocks the transmission of data on            RW     0x0
I2C bus even if Tx FIFO has data to transmit. - 1’b0: The transmission of data
starts on I2C bus automatically, as soon as the first data is available in the Tx
FIFO. Note: To block the execution of Master commands, set the
TX_CMD_BLOCK bit only when Tx FIFO is empty (IC_STATUS[2]==1) and
Master is in Idle state (IC_STATUS[5] == 0). Any further commands put in the
Tx FIFO are not executed until TX_CMD_BLOCK bit is unset. Reset value:
IC_TX_CMD_BLOCK_DEFAULT
Enumerated values:
0x0 → NOT_BLOCKED: Tx Command execution not blocked
0x1 → BLOCKED: Tx Command execution blocked

Bits       Description                                                                           Type    Reset
1          ABORT: When set, the controller initiates the transfer abort. - 0: ABORT not          RW      0x0
initiated or ABORT done - 1: ABORT operation in progress The software can
abort the I2C transfer in master mode by setting this bit. The software can set
this bit only when ENABLE is already set; otherwise, the controller ignores any
write to ABORT bit. The software cannot clear the ABORT bit once set. In
response to an ABORT, the controller issues a STOP and flushes the Tx FIFO
after completing the current transfer, then sets the TX_ABORT interrupt after
the abort operation. The ABORT bit is cleared automatically after the abort
operation.
For a detailed description on how to abort I2C transfers, refer to 'Aborting I2C
Transfers'.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLE: ABORT operation not in progress
0x1 → ENABLED: ABORT operation in progress
0          ENABLE: Controls whether the DW_apb_i2c is enabled. - 0: Disables                     RW      0x0
DW_apb_i2c (TX and RX FIFOs are held in an erased state) - 1: Enables
DW_apb_i2c Software can disable DW_apb_i2c while it is active. However, it is
important that care be taken to ensure that DW_apb_i2c is disabled properly. A
recommended procedure is described in 'Disabling DW_apb_i2c'.
When DW_apb_i2c is disabled, the following occurs: - The TX FIFO and RX
FIFO get flushed. - Status bits in the IC_INTR_STAT register are still active until
DW_apb_i2c goes into IDLE state. If the module is transmitting, it stops as well
as deletes the contents of the transmit buffer after the current transfer is
complete. If the module is receiving, the DW_apb_i2c stops the current
transfer at the end of the current byte and does not acknowledge the transfer.
In systems with asynchronous pclk and ic_clk when IC_CLK_TYPE parameter
set to asynchronous (1), there is a two ic_clk delay when enabling or disabling
the DW_apb_i2c. For a detailed description on how to disable DW_apb_i2c,
refer to 'Disabling DW_apb_i2c'
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: I2C is disabled
0x1 → ENABLED: I2C is enabled
I2C: IC_STATUS Register
Offset: 0x70
Description
I2C Status Register
This is a read-only register used to indicate the current transfer status and FIFO status. The status register may be read
at any time. None of the bits in this register request an interrupt.
When the I2C is disabled by writing 0 in bit 0 of the IC_ENABLE register: - Bits 1 and 2 are set to 1 - Bits 3 and 10 are set
to 0 When the master or slave state machines goes to idle and ic_en=0: - Bits 5 and 6 are set to 0

Table 1081.
Bits   Description                                                                            Type   Reset
IC_STATUS Register
31:7   Reserved.                                                                              -      -
6      SLV_ACTIVITY: Slave FSM Activity Status. When the Slave Finite State                   RO     0x0
Machine (FSM) is not in the IDLE state, this bit is set. - 0: Slave FSM is in IDLE
state so the Slave part of DW_apb_i2c is not Active - 1: Slave FSM is not in
IDLE state so the Slave part of DW_apb_i2c is Active Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → IDLE: Slave is idle
0x1 → ACTIVE: Slave not idle
5      MST_ACTIVITY: Master FSM Activity Status. When the Master Finite State                 RO     0x0
Machine (FSM) is not in the IDLE state, this bit is set. - 0: Master FSM is in
IDLE state so the Master part of DW_apb_i2c is not Active - 1: Master FSM is
not in IDLE state so the Master part of DW_apb_i2c is Active Note:
IC_STATUS[0]-that is, ACTIVITY bit-is the OR of SLV_ACTIVITY and
MST_ACTIVITY bits.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → IDLE: Master is idle
0x1 → ACTIVE: Master not idle
4      RFF: Receive FIFO Completely Full. When the receive FIFO is completely full,           RO     0x0
this bit is set. When the receive FIFO contains one or more empty location, this
bit is cleared. - 0: Receive FIFO is not full - 1: Receive FIFO is full Reset value:
0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → NOT_FULL: Rx FIFO not full
0x1 → FULL: Rx FIFO is full
3      RFNE: Receive FIFO Not Empty. This bit is set when the receive FIFO contains           RO     0x0
one or more entries; it is cleared when the receive FIFO is empty. - 0: Receive
FIFO is empty - 1: Receive FIFO is not empty Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → EMPTY: Rx FIFO is empty
0x1 → NOT_EMPTY: Rx FIFO not empty
2      TFE: Transmit FIFO Completely Empty. When the transmit FIFO is completely              RO     0x1
empty, this bit is set. When it contains one or more valid entries, this bit is
cleared. This bit field does not request an interrupt. - 0: Transmit FIFO is not
empty - 1: Transmit FIFO is empty Reset value: 0x1
Enumerated values:
0x0 → NON_EMPTY: Tx FIFO not empty
0x1 → EMPTY: Tx FIFO is empty
1      TFNF: Transmit FIFO Not Full. Set when the transmit FIFO contains one or               RO     0x1
more empty locations, and is cleared when the FIFO is full. - 0: Transmit FIFO
is full - 1: Transmit FIFO is not full Reset value: 0x1
Enumerated values:

Bits        Description                                                                       Type      Reset
0x0 → FULL: Tx FIFO is full
0x1 → NOT_FULL: Tx FIFO not full
0           ACTIVITY: I2C Activity Status. Reset value: 0x0                                   RO        0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: I2C is idle
0x1 → ACTIVE: I2C is active
I2C: IC_TXFLR Register
Offset: 0x74
Description
I2C Transmit FIFO Level Register This register contains the number of valid data entries in the transmit FIFO buffer.
It is cleared whenever: - The I2C is disabled - There is a transmit abort - that is, TX_ABRT bit is set in the
IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register - The slave bulk transmit mode is aborted The register increments whenever data is
placed into the transmit FIFO and decrements when data is taken from the transmit FIFO.
Table 1082. IC_TXFLR
Bits        Description                                                                       Type      Reset
Register
31:5        Reserved.                                                                         -         -
4:0         TXFLR: Transmit FIFO Level. Contains the number of valid data entries in the      RO        0x00
transmit FIFO.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_RXFLR Register
Offset: 0x78
Description
I2C Receive FIFO Level Register This register contains the number of valid data entries in the receive FIFO buffer. It
is cleared whenever: - The I2C is disabled - Whenever there is a transmit abort caused by any of the events tracked
in IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE The register increments whenever data is placed into the receive FIFO and decrements
when data is taken from the receive FIFO.
Table 1083. IC_RXFLR
Bits        Description                                                                       Type      Reset
Register
31:5        Reserved.                                                                         -         -
4:0         RXFLR: Receive FIFO Level. Contains the number of valid data entries in the       RO        0x00
receive FIFO.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_SDA_HOLD Register
Offset: 0x7c
Description
I2C SDA Hold Time Length Register
The bits [15:0] of this register are used to control the hold time of SDA during transmit in both slave and master mode
(after SCL goes from HIGH to LOW).
The bits [23:16] of this register are used to extend the SDA transition (if any) whenever SCL is HIGH in the receiver in

either master or slave mode.
Writes to this register succeed only when IC_ENABLE[0]=0.
The values in this register are in units of ic_clk period. The value programmed in IC_SDA_TX_HOLD must be greater than
the minimum hold time in each mode (one cycle in master mode, seven cycles in slave mode) for the value to be
implemented.
The programmed SDA hold time during transmit (IC_SDA_TX_HOLD) cannot exceed at any time the duration of the low
part of scl. Therefore the programmed value cannot be larger than N_SCL_LOW-2, where N_SCL_LOW is the duration of
the low part of the scl period measured in ic_clk cycles.
Table 1084.
Bits       Description                                                                      Type      Reset
IC_SDA_HOLD
Register
31:24      Reserved.                                                                        -         -
23:16      IC_SDA_RX_HOLD: Sets the required SDA hold time in units of ic_clk period,       RW        0x00
when DW_apb_i2c acts as a receiver.
Reset value: IC_DEFAULT_SDA_HOLD[23:16].
15:0       IC_SDA_TX_HOLD: Sets the required SDA hold time in units of ic_clk period,       RW        0x0001
when DW_apb_i2c acts as a transmitter.
Reset value: IC_DEFAULT_SDA_HOLD[15:0].
I2C: IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE Register
Offset: 0x80
Description
I2C Transmit Abort Source Register
This register has 32 bits that indicate the source of the TX_ABRT bit. Except for Bit 9, this register is cleared whenever
the IC_CLR_TX_ABRT register or the IC_CLR_INTR register is read. To clear Bit 9, the source of the
ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT must be fixed first; RESTART must be enabled (IC_CON[5]=1), the SPECIAL bit must be cleared
(IC_TAR[11]), or the GC_OR_START bit must be cleared (IC_TAR[10]).
Once the source of the ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT is fixed, then this bit can be cleared in the same manner as other bits in
this register. If the source of the ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT is not fixed before attempting to clear this bit, Bit 9 clears for
one cycle and is then re-asserted.
Table 1085.
Bits       Description                                                                      Type      Reset
IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE
Register
31:23      TX_FLUSH_CNT: This field indicates the number of Tx FIFO Data Commands           RO        0x000
which are flushed due to TX_ABRT interrupt. It is cleared whenever I2C is
disabled.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Slave-Transmitter
22:17      Reserved.                                                                        -         -
16         ABRT_USER_ABRT: This is a master-mode-only bit. Master has detected the          RO        0x0
transfer abort (IC_ENABLE[1])
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter
Enumerated values:

Bits   Description                                                                        Type   Reset
0x0 → ABRT_USER_ABRT_VOID: Transfer abort detected by master- scenario
not present
0x1 → ABRT_USER_ABRT_GENERATED: Transfer abort detected by master
15     ABRT_SLVRD_INTX: 1: When the processor side responds to a slave mode               RO     0x0
request for data to be transmitted to a remote master and user writes a 1 in
CMD (bit 8) of IC_DATA_CMD register.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Slave-Transmitter
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_SLVRD_INTX_VOID: Slave trying to transmit to remote master in
read mode- scenario not present
0x1 → ABRT_SLVRD_INTX_GENERATED: Slave trying to transmit to remote
master in read mode
14     ABRT_SLV_ARBLOST: This field indicates that a Slave has lost the bus while         RO     0x0
transmitting data to a remote master. IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE[12] is set at the
same time. Note: Even though the slave never 'owns' the bus, something could
go wrong on the bus. This is a fail safe check. For instance, during a data
transmission at the low-to-high transition of SCL, if what is on the data bus is
not what is supposed to be transmitted, then DW_apb_i2c no longer own the
bus.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Slave-Transmitter
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_SLV_ARBLOST_VOID: Slave lost arbitration to remote master-
scenario not present
0x1 → ABRT_SLV_ARBLOST_GENERATED: Slave lost arbitration to remote
master
13     ABRT_SLVFLUSH_TXFIFO: This field specifies that the Slave has received a           RO     0x0
read command and some data exists in the TX FIFO, so the slave issues a
TX_ABRT interrupt to flush old data in TX FIFO.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Slave-Transmitter
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_SLVFLUSH_TXFIFO_VOID: Slave flushes existing data in TX-FIFO
upon getting read command- scenario not present
0x1 → ABRT_SLVFLUSH_TXFIFO_GENERATED: Slave flushes existing data in
TX-FIFO upon getting read command

Bits   Description                                                                       Type   Reset
12     ARB_LOST: This field specifies that the Master has lost arbitration, or if        RO     0x0
IC_TX_ABRT_SOURCE[14] is also set, then the slave transmitter has lost
arbitration.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Slave-Transmitter
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_LOST_VOID: Master or Slave-Transmitter lost arbitration-
scenario not present
0x1 → ABRT_LOST_GENERATED: Master or Slave-Transmitter lost arbitration
11     ABRT_MASTER_DIS: This field indicates that the User tries to initiate a Master RO        0x0
operation with the Master mode disabled.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Master-Receiver
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_MASTER_DIS_VOID: User initiating master operation when
MASTER disabled- scenario not present
0x1 → ABRT_MASTER_DIS_GENERATED: User initiating master operation
when MASTER disabled
10     ABRT_10B_RD_NORSTRT: This field indicates that the restart is disabled            RO     0x0
(IC_RESTART_EN bit (IC_CON[5]) =0) and the master sends a read command
in 10-bit addressing mode.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Receiver
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_10B_RD_VOID: Master not trying to read in 10Bit addressing
mode when RESTART disabled
0x1 → ABRT_10B_RD_GENERATED: Master trying to read in 10Bit addressing
mode when RESTART disabled
9      ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT: To clear Bit 9, the source of the                             RO     0x0
ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT must be fixed first; restart must be enabled
(IC_CON[5]=1), the SPECIAL bit must be cleared (IC_TAR[11]), or the
GC_OR_START bit must be cleared (IC_TAR[10]). Once the source of the
ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT is fixed, then this bit can be cleared in the same
manner as other bits in this register. If the source of the
ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT is not fixed before attempting to clear this bit, bit 9
clears for one cycle and then gets reasserted. When this field is set to 1, the
restart is disabled (IC_RESTART_EN bit (IC_CON[5]) =0) and the user is trying
to send a START Byte.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master

Bits   Description                                                                   Type   Reset
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT_VOID: User trying to send START byte when
RESTART disabled- scenario not present
0x1 → ABRT_SBYTE_NORSTRT_GENERATED: User trying to send START byte
when RESTART disabled
8      ABRT_HS_NORSTRT: This field indicates that the restart is disabled            RO     0x0
(IC_RESTART_EN bit (IC_CON[5]) =0) and the user is trying to use the master
to transfer data in High Speed mode.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Master-Receiver
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_HS_NORSTRT_VOID: User trying to switch Master to HS mode
when RESTART disabled- scenario not present
0x1 → ABRT_HS_NORSTRT_GENERATED: User trying to switch Master to HS
mode when RESTART disabled
7      ABRT_SBYTE_ACKDET: This field indicates that the Master has sent a START      RO     0x0
Byte and the START Byte was acknowledged (wrong behavior).
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_SBYTE_ACKDET_VOID: ACK detected for START byte- scenario
not present
0x1 → ABRT_SBYTE_ACKDET_GENERATED: ACK detected for START byte
6      ABRT_HS_ACKDET: This field indicates that the Master is in High Speed mode RO        0x0
and the High Speed Master code was acknowledged (wrong behavior).
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_HS_ACK_VOID: HS Master code ACKed in HS Mode- scenario not
present
0x1 → ABRT_HS_ACK_GENERATED: HS Master code ACKed in HS Mode
5      ABRT_GCALL_READ: This field indicates that DW_apb_i2c in the master mode RO          0x0
has sent a General Call but the user programmed the byte following the
General Call to be a read from the bus (IC_DATA_CMD[9] is set to 1).
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter
Enumerated values:

Bits   Description                                                                      Type   Reset
0x0 → ABRT_GCALL_READ_VOID: GCALL is followed by read from bus-
scenario not present
0x1 → ABRT_GCALL_READ_GENERATED: GCALL is followed by read from bus
4      ABRT_GCALL_NOACK: This field indicates that DW_apb_i2c in master mode            RO     0x0
has sent a General Call and no slave on the bus acknowledged the General
Call.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_GCALL_NOACK_VOID: GCALL not ACKed by any slave-scenario
not present
0x1 → ABRT_GCALL_NOACK_GENERATED: GCALL not ACKed by any slave
3      ABRT_TXDATA_NOACK: This field indicates the master-mode only bit. When           RO     0x0
the master receives an acknowledgement for the address, but when it sends
data byte(s) following the address, it did not receive an acknowledge from the
remote slave(s).
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter
Enumerated values:
0x0 → ABRT_TXDATA_NOACK_VOID: Transmitted data non-ACKed by
addressed slave-scenario not present
0x1 → ABRT_TXDATA_NOACK_GENERATED: Transmitted data not ACKed by
addressed slave
2      ABRT_10ADDR2_NOACK: This field indicates that the Master is in 10-bit            RO     0x0
address mode and that the second address byte of the 10-bit address was not
acknowledged by any slave.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Master-Receiver
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: This abort is not generated
0x1 → ACTIVE: Byte 2 of 10Bit Address not ACKed by any slave
1      ABRT_10ADDR1_NOACK: This field indicates that the Master is in 10-bit            RO     0x0
address mode and the first 10-bit address byte was not acknowledged by any
slave.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Master-Receiver
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: This abort is not generated

Bits       Description                                                                            Type   Reset
0x1 → ACTIVE: Byte 1 of 10Bit Address not ACKed by any slave
0          ABRT_7B_ADDR_NOACK: This field indicates that the Master is in 7-bit                   RO     0x0
addressing mode and the address sent was not acknowledged by any slave.
Reset value: 0x0
Role of DW_apb_i2c: Master-Transmitter or Master-Receiver
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: This abort is not generated
0x1 → ACTIVE: This abort is generated because of NOACK for 7-bit address
I2C: IC_SLV_DATA_NACK_ONLY Register
Offset: 0x84
Description
Generate Slave Data NACK Register
The register is used to generate a NACK for the data part of a transfer when DW_apb_i2c is acting as a slave-receiver.
This register only exists when the IC_SLV_DATA_NACK_ONLY parameter is set to 1. When this parameter disabled, this
register does not exist and writing to the register’s address has no effect.
A write can occur on this register if both of the following conditions are met: - DW_apb_i2c is disabled (IC_ENABLE[0] =
0) - Slave part is inactive (IC_STATUS[6] = 0) Note: The IC_STATUS[6] is a register read-back location for the internal
slv_activity signal; the user should poll this before writing the ic_slv_data_nack_only bit.
Table 1086.
Bits       Description                                                                            Type   Reset
IC_SLV_DATA_NACK_
ONLY Register
31:1       Reserved.                                                                              -      -
0          NACK: Generate NACK. This NACK generation only occurs when DW_apb_i2c                  RW     0x0
is a slave-receiver. If this register is set to a value of 1, it can only generate a
NACK after a data byte is received; hence, the data transfer is aborted and the
data received is not pushed to the receive buffer.
When the register is set to a value of 0, it generates NACK/ACK, depending on
normal criteria. - 1: generate NACK after data byte received - 0: generate
NACK/ACK normally Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: Slave receiver generates NACK normally
0x1 → ENABLED: Slave receiver generates NACK upon data reception only
I2C: IC_DMA_CR Register
Offset: 0x88
Description
DMA Control Register
The register is used to enable the DMA Controller interface operation. There is a separate bit for transmit and receive.
This can be programmed regardless of the state of IC_ENABLE.
Table 1087.
Bits       Description                                                                            Type   Reset
IC_DMA_CR Register
31:2       Reserved.                                                                              -      -

Bits        Description                                                                           Type   Reset
1           TDMAE: Transmit DMA Enable. This bit enables/disables the transmit FIFO               RW     0x0
DMA channel. Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: transmit FIFO DMA channel disabled
0x1 → ENABLED: Transmit FIFO DMA channel enabled
0           RDMAE: Receive DMA Enable. This bit enables/disables the receive FIFO DMA RW                 0x0
channel. Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: Receive FIFO DMA channel disabled
0x1 → ENABLED: Receive FIFO DMA channel enabled
I2C: IC_DMA_TDLR Register
Offset: 0x8c
Description
DMA Transmit Data Level Register
Table 1088.
Bits        Description                                                                           Type   Reset
IC_DMA_TDLR
Register
31:4        Reserved.                                                                             -      -
3:0         DMATDL: Transmit Data Level. This bit field controls the level at which a DMA         RW     0x0
request is made by the transmit logic. It is equal to the watermark level; that is,
the dma_tx_req signal is generated when the number of valid data entries in
the transmit FIFO is equal to or below this field value, and TDMAE = 1.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_DMA_RDLR Register
Offset: 0x90
Description
I2C Receive Data Level Register
Table 1089.
Bits        Description                                                                           Type   Reset
IC_DMA_RDLR
Register
31:4        Reserved.                                                                             -      -
3:0         DMARDL: Receive Data Level. This bit field controls the level at which a DMA          RW     0x0
request is made by the receive logic. The watermark level = DMARDL+1; that
is, dma_rx_req is generated when the number of valid data entries in the
receive FIFO is equal to or more than this field value + 1, and RDMAE =1. For
instance, when DMARDL is 0, then dma_rx_req is asserted when 1 or more
data entries are present in the receive FIFO.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_SDA_SETUP Register
Offset: 0x94

Description
I2C SDA Setup Register
This register controls the amount of time delay (in terms of number of ic_clk clock periods) introduced in the rising edge
of SCL - relative to SDA changing - when DW_apb_i2c services a read request in a slave-transmitter operation. The
relevant I2C requirement is tSU:DAT (note 4) as detailed in the I2C Bus Specification. This register must be programmed
with a value equal to or greater than 2.
Writes to this register succeed only when IC_ENABLE[0] = 0.
Note: The length of setup time is calculated using [(IC_SDA_SETUP - 1) * (ic_clk_period)], so if the user requires 10 ic_clk
periods of setup time, they should program a value of 11. The IC_SDA_SETUP register is only used by the DW_apb_i2c
when operating as a slave transmitter.
Table 1090.
Bits        Description                                                                         Type    Reset
IC_SDA_SETUP
Register
31:8        Reserved.                                                                           -       -
7:0         SDA_SETUP: SDA Setup. It is recommended that if the required delay is               RW      0x64
1000ns, then for an ic_clk frequency of 10 MHz, IC_SDA_SETUP should be
programmed to a value of 11. IC_SDA_SETUP must be programmed with a
minimum value of 2.
I2C: IC_ACK_GENERAL_CALL Register
Offset: 0x98
Description
I2C ACK General Call Register
The register controls whether DW_apb_i2c responds with a ACK or NACK when it receives an I2C General Call address.
This register is applicable only when the DW_apb_i2c is in slave mode.
Table 1091.
Bits        Description                                                                         Type    Reset
IC_ACK_GENERAL_CA
LL Register
31:1        Reserved.                                                                           -       -
0           ACK_GEN_CALL: ACK General Call. When set to 1, DW_apb_i2c responds with             RW      0x1
a ACK (by asserting ic_data_oe) when it receives a General Call. Otherwise,
DW_apb_i2c responds with a NACK (by negating ic_data_oe).
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: Generate NACK for a General Call
0x1 → ENABLED: Generate ACK for a General Call
I2C: IC_ENABLE_STATUS Register
Offset: 0x9c
Description
I2C Enable Status Register
The register is used to report the DW_apb_i2c hardware status when the IC_ENABLE[0] register is set from 1 to 0; that is,
when DW_apb_i2c is disabled.
If IC_ENABLE[0] has been set to 1, bits 2:1 are forced to 0, and bit 0 is forced to 1.
If IC_ENABLE[0] has been set to 0, bits 2:1 is only be valid as soon as bit 0 is read as '0'.
Note: When IC_ENABLE[0] has been set to 0, a delay occurs for bit 0 to be read as 0 because disabling the DW_apb_i2c
depends on I2C bus activities.

Table 1092.
Bits   Description                                                                        Type   Reset
IC_ENABLE_STATUS
Register
31:3   Reserved.                                                                          -      -
2      SLV_RX_DATA_LOST: Slave Received Data Lost. This bit indicates if a Slave-         RO     0x0
Receiver operation has been aborted with at least one data byte received from
an I2C transfer due to the setting bit 0 of IC_ENABLE from 1 to 0. When read
as 1, DW_apb_i2c is deemed to have been actively engaged in an aborted I2C
transfer (with matching address) and the data phase of the I2C transfer has
been entered, even though a data byte has been responded with a NACK.
Note: If the remote I2C master terminates the transfer with a STOP condition
before the DW_apb_i2c has a chance to NACK a transfer, and IC_ENABLE[0]
has been set to 0, then this bit is also set to 1.
When read as 0, DW_apb_i2c is deemed to have been disabled without being
actively involved in the data phase of a Slave-Receiver transfer.
Note: The CPU can safely read this bit when IC_EN (bit 0) is read as 0.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → INACTIVE: Slave RX Data is not lost
0x1 → ACTIVE: Slave RX Data is lost
1      SLV_DISABLED_WHILE_BUSY: Slave Disabled While Busy (Transmit, Receive). RO                0x0
This bit indicates if a potential or active Slave operation has been aborted due
to the setting bit 0 of the IC_ENABLE register from 1 to 0. This bit is set when
the CPU writes a 0 to the IC_ENABLE register while:
(a) DW_apb_i2c is receiving the address byte of the Slave-Transmitter
operation from a remote master;
OR,
(b) address and data bytes of the Slave-Receiver operation from a remote
master.
When read as 1, DW_apb_i2c is deemed to have forced a NACK during any
part of an I2C transfer, irrespective of whether the I2C address matches the
slave address set in DW_apb_i2c (IC_SAR register) OR if the transfer is
completed before IC_ENABLE is set to 0 but has not taken effect.
Note: If the remote I2C master terminates the transfer with a STOP condition
before the DW_apb_i2c has a chance to NACK a transfer, and IC_ENABLE[0]
has been set to 0, then this bit will also be set to 1.
When read as 0, DW_apb_i2c is deemed to have been disabled when there is
master activity, or when the I2C bus is idle.
Note: The CPU can safely read this bit when IC_EN (bit 0) is read as 0.
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:

Bits        Description                                                                         Type     Reset
0x0 → INACTIVE: Slave is disabled when it is idle
0x1 → ACTIVE: Slave is disabled when it is active
0           IC_EN: ic_en Status. This bit always reflects the value driven on the output port RO         0x0
ic_en. - When read as 1, DW_apb_i2c is deemed to be in an enabled state. -
When read as 0, DW_apb_i2c is deemed completely inactive. Note: The CPU
can safely read this bit anytime. When this bit is read as 0, the CPU can safely
read SLV_RX_DATA_LOST (bit 2) and SLV_DISABLED_WHILE_BUSY (bit 1).
Reset value: 0x0
Enumerated values:
0x0 → DISABLED: I2C disabled
0x1 → ENABLED: I2C enabled
I2C: IC_FS_SPKLEN Register
Offset: 0xa0
Description
I2C SS, FS or FM+ spike suppression limit
This register is used to store the duration, measured in ic_clk cycles, of the longest spike that is filtered out by the spike
suppression logic when the component is operating in SS, FS or FM+ modes. The relevant I2C requirement is tSP (table
4) as detailed in the I2C Bus Specification. This register must be programmed with a minimum value of 1.
Table 1093.
Bits        Description                                                                         Type     Reset
IC_FS_SPKLEN
Register
31:8        Reserved.                                                                           -        -
7:0         IC_FS_SPKLEN: This register must be set before any I2C bus transaction can          RW       0x07
take place to ensure stable operation. This register sets the duration,
measured in ic_clk cycles, of the longest spike in the SCL or SDA lines that will
be filtered out by the spike suppression logic. This register can be written only
when the I2C interface is disabled which corresponds to the IC_ENABLE[0]
register being set to 0. Writes at other times have no effect. The minimum
valid value is 1; hardware prevents values less than this being written, and if
attempted results in 1 being set. or more information, refer to 'Spike
Suppression'.
I2C: IC_CLR_RESTART_DET Register
Offset: 0xa8
Description
Clear RESTART_DET Interrupt Register

Table 1094.
Bits        Description                                                                  Type         Reset
IC_CLR_RESTART_DET
Register
31:1        Reserved.                                                                    -            -
0           CLR_RESTART_DET: Read this register to clear the RESTART_DET interrupt       RO           0x0
(bit 12) of IC_RAW_INTR_STAT register.
Reset value: 0x0
I2C: IC_COMP_PARAM_1 Register
Offset: 0xf4
Description
Component Parameter Register 1
Note This register is not implemented and therefore reads as 0. If it was implemented it would be a constant read-only
register that contains encoded information about the component’s parameter settings. Fields shown below are the
settings for those parameters
Table 1095.
Bits        Description                                                                  Type         Reset
IC_COMP_PARAM_1
Register
31:24       Reserved.                                                                    -            -
23:16       TX_BUFFER_DEPTH: TX Buffer Depth = 16                                        RO           0x00
15:8        RX_BUFFER_DEPTH: RX Buffer Depth = 16                                        RO           0x00
7           ADD_ENCODED_PARAMS: Encoded parameters not visible                           RO           0x0
6           HAS_DMA: DMA handshaking signals are enabled                                 RO           0x0
5           INTR_IO: COMBINED Interrupt outputs                                          RO           0x0
4           HC_COUNT_VALUES: Programmable count values for each mode.                    RO           0x0
3:2         MAX_SPEED_MODE: MAX SPEED MODE = FAST MODE                                   RO           0x0
1:0         APB_DATA_WIDTH: APB data bus width is 32 bits                                RO           0x0
I2C: IC_COMP_VERSION Register
Offset: 0xf8
Description
I2C Component Version Register
Table 1096.
Bits           Description                                                     Type           Reset
IC_COMP_VERSION
Register
31:0           IC_COMP_VERSION                                                 RO             0x3230312a
I2C: IC_COMP_TYPE Register
Offset: 0xfc
Description
I2C Component Type Register
